A mediaevalist trying to be a philosopher and a philosopher trying to be a
mediaevalist write about theology, philosophy, scholarship, books, the middle
ages, and especially the life, times, and thought of the Doctor Subtilis, the
Blessed John Duns Scotus.

A mediaevalist trying to be a philosopher and a philosopher trying to be a
mediaevalist write about theology, philosophy, scholarship, books, the middle
ages, and especially the life, times, and thought of the Doctor Subtilis, the
Blessed John Duns Scotus.

I have written on the topic as well recently (see the first blog entry of the
year), so I have a few points of criticism.

One is that McGrath makes no mention of Christian Wolff, who wrote a natural
theology that was quite influential on the continent. Indeed, McGrath is
focused on the English understanding of natural theology as closely allied
with natural philosophy and the physical sciences.

This means that McGrath makes no mention at all of Nicolas Bonetus, the first
person to write a _Theologia naturalis_ and assign it a place among the system
of sciences inherited from Aristotle. But perhaps, since this the encylopedia
is electronic, the author will update it later.

More of an oddity than anything else, McGrath treats the natural theology of
Raymond Sebonde under the heading of 'Renaissance and Reformation', though he
notes that it is from the late fiftheenth century, surely part of the medieval
era. And again, Sebonde was writing a hundered years after Bonetus.

We come to Duns Scotus. McGrath devotes only a paragraph to Scotus, and, given
that the English discussion of natural theology and natural philosophy is
predominate, the only doctrine of Scotus that is singled out is the notion of
Haecceity.

> A further development of importance to natural theology was due to the
> Franciscan theologian Duns Scotus and his successors. The concept of
> _haeccitas_ (‘this-ness’) emerged during the fourteenth century as a means
> of capturing and preserving the distinct identity of any particular aspect
> of the natural order. Although this concept was important for the philosophy
> of religion, it was adopted in the nineteenth century by the Jesuit poet
> Gerard Manley Hopkins, who used it as the basis of a heightened
> attentiveness to the individual aspects of nature (Boggs 1997), which is
> particularly evident in his 1877 poem ‘As Kingfishers Catch Fire’.

So no mention of univocity of being, or Scotus' proof for the existence of
God, or the nature of metaphysics and theology. the former doctrine, as is
well known, is treated under the rubric of natural knowledge of God.

In the end it makes an interesting contrast with Milbank and his school, for
whom Scotus is of cosmic catastrophic significance. For McGrath, it seems
Scotus is mainly of interest because of the poetry he inspired.

Lol, when you are so British that the most contact you've had with a
continent-traveling major thinker of your very commonwealth is through some
homegrown Victorian poet.

