Si  
Does St.Faustina have a serious argument for this?  
How would anyone know how angels would feel? It may not he a platitude, but it
seems like a projection of thé Saint's personal emotions to me.  
Not very convincing.  
Now instead of assertong that I don't understand it, why don't you come up
with something that shows you understand what you are claiming?  

@jmchugh  
  
As St. Dionysius the Areopagite beautifully wrote "the being punished is not
an evil, but the becoming worthy of punishment; nor the being deservedly
expelled from Holy things, but the becoming accursed of God, and unholy and
unfit for things un-defiled." (D.N. 4.22).  
  
God Almighty created nothing "worthy of punishment" or "accursed", and,
contrary to your claim, the only man that He created was Adam, who has been
redeemed by the New Adam. As St. John of Damascus wrote in Disputatio Saraceni
et Christiani:  
  
"I find nowhere in Scripture that after the first week of making the world God
formed or created anything. If he disputes this, then let him show you the
form or creation made by God after the first week. There is nothing to show.
All visible created things came to be in that week. God made man in the first
week. He ordered him to go forth and multiply. Since man was living with a
living seed, he sowed this seed in his wife. So he generated man, as the
Scripture says: 'Adam generated Seth. Seth generated Enos. Enos generated
Cainan. And Cainan generated Malaleel. Malaleel generated Jared. Jared
generated Enoch.' It does not say that God formed Seth or Enoch, or anyone
else. This we acknowledge, that only Adam was formed by God. All those after
him have and still are generated."

RomanJoe! I haven't seen you online in a while. I hope things in life go well.
Have you gotten more light on the effect of the gray rain curtain? lol rock
on, bro.

@Walter. Of course he could make creatures that don’t suffer. However He is
creating creatures that will participate in the trinity. That may seem like a
cheap thing to you, but it’s an inexpressible, inconceivable thing. We’re not
talking about having a very powerful magician living in your house. This is
about finite creatures partaking in the eternal, the very ground of being
itself.  
  
Maybe if you were God, you would ‘click your fingers’ and have an instant
ready made family of robots that have no choice but to do your will, and agree
with you about everything?  
  
It always baffles me that people presume so much about how God should be, and
what He should do, if only he was as wise and good as they are. Lucifer has
spread his original error widely.

You should approach him with a picket sign saying "G-d hates fags. Fags die
G-d laughs"  
  
However, I never understood the logic of that protest. The opposite of love is
not hatred but indifference. Saying G-d hates you means that you're important
and He recognizes you, and that's just as good as love IMO.

@Walter  
  
"No, suffering is not a necessary part of our creation unless your claim is
that the fall was necessary.  
The point of the Fall is that man and not God is responsible for the Fall, but
nobody can be responsible for a necessary truth. that would be like saying you
are responsible for why 1 + 1 = 2."  
  
Hey man, just pointing that out:  
  
Simon claim at most is that the fall is necessary if there is rational
creatures. Ot is what St. Thomas would call necessary by suposition(i think).  
  
Since God could just not create rational creatures, the fall is not a
necessary truth even on Simon view*  
  
Knowing that, it seems that man could be responsable for the fall. if by "the
fall was necessary" we mean "if humans exist them the fall has to happen".  
  
  
*if it indeed is his view.

In general we are governed by moral imbeciles. They need reminding of their
condition because their vanity takes lack of condemnation for approval.

Simon  
  
It always baffles me to see how people can claim on one hand that God can do
absurd things like making thing from nothing while ex nihilo nihil fit, can be
a motionless locomotive and pull a train or can be simp;e and three at the
same time, but on the other hand cannot create creatures who do not suffer.  
"Evolution" in and out of itself does not entail the necessity of suffering at
all.

Besides, if God made and sustains every created nature, some misunderstand
this to mean that God is also the author of the so-called "natural evil"
(although according to the Christian understanding evil is contrary to nature
and thus "unnatural") or fancy that everything that happens in the world is
"the work of God", as if secondary causes (i.e. the natures themselves, with
their proper activities and limitations) did not exist.

@jmchugh:  
  
"But that is only true if we assume that the only alternative is your view of
what happened or my non-existence."  
  
You neither have disputed any of my arguments nor presented any "alternative"
to anything whatsoever, so I do not know what you mean here. To recap: Satan
rebelled, the fall happened. Did they had horrific consequences? Sure enough.
Did something good happened because of it that would not have happened
otherwise? Definitely yes, namely, you and I are here. More importantly, the
incarnation and the resurrection and the Blessed Virgin mother and the whole
redemption story. This pretty much sums up my rejoinder.  
  
"My question been about the logic of Christian theodicy. For example why did
God create Satan if he knew that this devil would lead a rebellion with such
horrific consequences?"  
  
I do not know what you mean by "Christian theodicy"; as far as the question
itself, yes I did answered. On the other hand, if you mean something like
finding a *moral justification* for God's actions, you are correct that I did
not do, and I hasten to add that I will *not* do it, because in my view that
is a meaningless question and a reading of the book of Job should cure one of
such attempts.  
  
"My suggestion is not my non-existence as being preferable but rather that
your view of what happened is incorrect because it is implausible."  
  
Now you gesture vaguely that there is some "alternative", but you have not
presented such; I do not dispute that God could have created other worlds (in
the sense of an entire universe with a different history altogether), worlds
where the fall did not happen or Satan qua Satan does not exist. What I did
and do dispute is that such an alternative world is better, or even better in
some qualified sense. (1) We cannot possibly ascertain such things, because we
have neither the criteria nor the knowledge. (2) Good things happened because
of the rebellion and the fall happened, good things that would not have
happened otherwise and (3) preferring an alternative world where I do not
exist is incoherent, which is what the logic of your argument entails. You
have not shown or even so much as explained, where any of the three points is
wrong or how exactly is my view "implausible".

As this last remark indicates, the loss of worldly blessings – material goods,
reputation, friendships, health, livelihood, even life itself – is permitted
by God so that we might learn not to cling to these things at the expense of
the beatific vision, the value of which trumps all else. God thus only ever
permits suffering not in spite of his goodness, but rather precisely because
of his goodness. As Augustine says, there isn’t “any evil [that] happens to
the faithful and godly which cannot be turned to profit,” so that, with St.
Paul, “we know that all things work together for good to them that love God”
(Romans 8:28).

Simon  
  
No, suffering is not a necessary part of our creation unless your claim is
that the fall was necessary.  
The point of the Fall is that man and not God is responsible for the Fall, but
nobody can be responisble for a necessary truth. that would be like saying you
are responsible for why 1 + 1 = 2.

@grodrigues  
  
Thank you for your reply. I wouldn't ask the devil what he thinks as he is the
apotheosis of evil. But now that you mention it, why did God create Satan in
the first place knowing full well what he would do? There is no way that you
could argue that the actual existence of Satan is a positive good.  
  
Now, as to us mortals you set-up a false dichotomy. You suggest that either we
accept the traditional notion of the fall and its consequences, or that we
accept the non-existence of man.  
  
But there are more options than that. For we could accept for example
universal salvation, annihilationism, or reincarnation.  

Many today labor under the delusion that the reality of suffering is a
difficulty for Christianity – as if Christian doctrine would lead us to expect
little or no suffering, so that its adherents should be flummoxed by
suffering’s prevalence. As I have discussed in previous articles, this is the
reverse of the truth. The Catholic faith teaches that suffering [is the
inexorable consequence](https://edwardfeser.blogspot.com/2021/09/the-first-
world-problem-of-evil.html) of original sin and past actual sin. [It is an
essential part](https://edwardfeser.blogspot.com/2022/05/nietzsche-and-christ-
on-suffering.html) of the long and painful process of sanctification, of
overcoming sinful habits of thought and action. It is the inevitable
concomitant of the persecution Christians must face for preaching the Gospel
and condemning the world’s wickedness. It is an inescapable punishment for
sin, which we must embrace in a penitential spirit. By way of suffering we pay
both our own temporal debt and that of others for whom we might offer up our
suffering. By way of it we most closely unite ourselves to Christ’s Passion.
The extent and depth of human suffering thus _confirms_ rather than
disconfirms the claims of Christianity.

@Walter. I didn’t see your reply here, but you really don’t understand at all.
If you did, you would understand why Saint Faustina said this;  
  
“If the angels were capable of envy, they would envy us for two things: one is
the receiving of Holy Communion, and the other is suffering.”  
  
Angels have immense power and knowledge given directly in their creation. But
when St Faustina says this it’s not meaningless platitudes. It’s at the heart
of what you cannot see.

@rodrigues  
  
If I have not presented plausible alternatives that is because I lack your
certainty. You are absolutely certain that your religion's story of the
creation and fall is true. I hold no such certainty.  
  
But I do reserve the right to question. If someone comes up to me and says
"your suffering is caused by X" and I ask for details and the apologist
responds "Well what's the alternative, your non-existence?" I would find that
a curious and non-rational answer.  
  
Let me say more: A judge tells me that I must do penance for an alleged crime
my great grandfather did. And the judge tells me this crime would never have
happened without his, the judge's, intervention.  
  
I immediately would have two questions. Why am I responsible for my great-
grandfather's crime? And two, why on earth did you Mr. Judge, put me in this
untenable situation in the first place?  
  
These are rational questions to put to the judge. Yes?

Indeed  
And the sexual sins of contraception have actually reduced the number of
abortions. If there is no conception, God cannot abort "unborn babies" and
many abortions are, in fact, the work of God.  
During the Middle Ages, lots of pregnancies ended in "spontaneous" abortions
and miscarriages. But I suppose the fact that God performed them makes them
good things.  
Not ot mention the countless number of children who died because there simply
were too many mouth to feed.  
Those were the great days when there was so much less "sexual sin".

In chapter 8, Augustine notes that while there is in this life _some_
connection between evildoing and suffering on the one hand, and righteousness
and blessings on the other, it is very far from tight. The wicked enjoy many
good things, while the good suffer much misfortune. To be sure, this will be
redressed in the afterlife, when the good will be rewarded with eternal
happiness and the wicked with eternal torment. “But as for the good things of
this life, and its ills,” Augustine writes, “God has willed that these should
be common to both; that we might not too eagerly covet the things which wicked
men are seen equally to enjoy, nor shrink with an unseemly fear from the ills
which even good men often suffer.”

@Cont)  
  
"So, Quark the Ferengi Bartender is a fictional character, but, if we take
your view, He will actually exist some day, because, existing badly is better
than not existing"  
  
At most this would require believe in a type of multiverse, hardly a thing
considered insane nowdays.  
  
But i dont think that this point of yours works. One can suppose that God was
interessed on a qualitative maximization of goodness, so He created all
possible categories of goodness, incluiding corruptive sensible beings like
cats and birds. A quantitative maximization, creating all possible beings, was
not choosen likely for being not necessary, i really have no way of knowing
here. Remember aways that i dont think that there is a best of all possible
worlds, there is away a better, so trying to create one with ALL possible
beings would be dumb.  
  
"Notive also how Jesus says that it would have been better for them if they
hadn't been born."  
  
Pulling a Aquinas here, one can suggest two options:  
  
1\. Hyperbole. This is the Parables Guy after all.  
  
2\. He only meant that Judas would being better of dying on the womb, before
choosing to betrayal God.  
  
Pick the better one and continue reading, my boy.  
  
  
"On a final note, it is not a christian view that God has the right to kill
just because he is God."  
  
Abraaham and Isaac, you know. There are a few church fathers that would agree
with you, sure, but that is about it.  
  
Anyway, it seems to me that the whole disagreement is on the worth of beings
that can suffer. Like most people that opposed the gnostics, i argue that
beings that do suffer are worth existing and you, having very diferent
metaphysics, do not.  
  
Anyway, the discussion is sure being helpful, allowing to see the issue more
clearly and also with diferent eyes.

_Where can we readily find a man who holds in fit and just estimation those
persons on account of whose revolting pride, luxury, and avarice, and cursed
iniquities and impiety, God now smites the earth as His predictions
threatened? Where is the man who lives with them in the style in which it
becomes us to live with them?  For often we wickedly blind ourselves to the
occasions of teaching and admonishing them, sometimes even of reprimanding and
chiding them, either because we shrink from the labor or are ashamed to offend
them, or because we fear to lose good friendships, lest this should stand in
the way of our advancement, or injure us in some worldly matter, which either
our covetous disposition desires to obtain, or our weakness shrinks from
losing.  So that, although the conduct of wicked men is distasteful to the
good, and therefore they do not fall with them into that damnation which in
the next life awaits such persons, yet, because they spare their damnable sins
through fear, therefore, even though their own sins be slight and venial, they
are justly scourged with the wicked in this world, though in eternity they
quite escape punishment. Justly, when God afflicts them in common with the
wicked, do they find this life bitter, through love of whose sweetness they
declined to be bitter to these sinners_.

Just complementing Simon* good post:  
  
"Also if non- religious people are committing what Catholics view as serious
sins do the persons themselves have any culpability if they do not see what
they are doing as wrong?"  
  
On catholic doctrine, ignorance of our moral duties can weaken or even destroy
culpability. If i'am ignorant enough of ethics that i dont know that, say,
smoking pot is wrong and could not know it, them my activity is likely not a
sin.  
  
But there is the diference between invencible and vencible ignorance. If i
cant know my duty at all them there is no sin. But if i can know my duty and
do not bother knowing it either because i want to stsy ignorant or because of
neglet, them i'am sinning.  
*Hey man!

There is no answer to the problem of evil that will ever be sufficient--the
closest we can get is an answer that admits it can't be solved insofar as
we're not in an epistemological position to solve it. Beyond the gray rain
curtain of this world we can only hope that whatever evils exists in this life
will seem no worse than a stubbed toe in the next.

To bring this post down to where the rubber meets the road, I have a boss who
is "married" to a person of the same sex. Am I to understand this post
correctly as to be saying I have an obligation to tell her that she is living
in sin, despite the consequences to my ability to do or keep my job?

Dr. Feser writes, :"Consider the sexual sins into which our age has sunk more
deeply than any previous one." During the Middle Ages, there was widespread
immorality, and this was when the Catholic Church was at the height of its
power.  
https://www.brown.edu/Departments/Italian_Studies/dweb/society/sex/fornication-
adultery.php  
  
Even during the Black Death which devastated Europe, and which some in the
Church thought was a divine chastisement, sexual immorality continued
unabated.  
  
https://notchesblog.com/2020/03/12/behaviour-which-merits-a-horrible-and-
wretched-death-sex-sin-and-the-black-death-in-medieval-england/  
  
  
  

The application to the present day is obvious. Consider the sexual sins into
which our age has, arguably, sunk more deeply than any previous one. So as to
avoid criticizing these sins too harshly or even talking much about them at
all, even many otherwise conservative Christians lie to themselves about their
gravity, pretending they are slight when in fact (and as the tradition has
always insisted) they are extremely serious. Such sins have, among their
consequences: the even graver sin of murder, in the form of abortion;
fatherlessness and the poverty and social breakdown that is its sequel;
addiction to pornography and the marital problems it brings in its wake; the
loneliness and economic insecurity of women who in their youth were used by
men for pleasure, and are later unable to find husbands; a general breakdown
in rationality that has now reached the point where even the objective
difference between men and women is shrilly denied; and the willingness to
mutilate children’s bodies in the name of this gender ideology.

Walter, free will is what it really means. It can choose what is right - or
corruption. Human nature is essentially good, of course, and St. Thomas
explains the corruption that now accompanies it as accidental.

@Simon  
  
That is completely correct! The whole christian experience is to find out not
that there is a superhero out there that demands this or that, but that the
One beyond being and non-being is here and that He reveals to you that your
understanding is not exactly right. The Crucified God is the most bizarre
thing that ever was defended, but it happened, and it only seems bizarre
because we are bad judges.  
  
And you are right again on the eucharistic! I did have a lot of time with Him
in a few situations and these are aways very strong experiences. I do need to
do it more!

My problem is the suffering of infants who are too young to heroically accept
it, and hence would not merit from it.

@jmchugh:  
  
"Firstly, do you think questioning this dogma is understandable?"  
  
What is the point of this question? I would be more sympathetic, if not only
you had actually engaged with the points I have made, but your view of
Christianity was an informed one; as it is, the problem you seem to be having
is not a rational problem (say, harmonizing two apparently contradictory
statements) but a spiritual one and spiritual problems are not resolved with
arguments. Of course I could be wrong, and diagnosis at a distance is fraught
with problems, but that is my distinctive impression.  
  
"From a purely intellectual perspective do you think the Christian story would
be the one you intellectually would most assent to?"  
  
I have no idea where you are going with this question. The "Christian story",
to call it that, *is* the one I hold as true, so what answer are you
expecting? You *seem* to think that all religious views are on the same
footing and all are equally false; even if they were all false, to hold that
they are on the same footing is just preposterous. You also *seem* to think
that there is some sort of disjunction between "purely intellectual" views and
theological (???) views as backed up by some purported divine revelation.
There isn't; and if there was, I would be a case of intellectual
schizophrenia.  
  
"Let's say you were a pagan with no particular views on this matter."  
  
How the hell should I know what I would think if I were a completely different
person in completely different circumstances? Once again, what is your point
with this kind of questions?

"But because of the incomprehensibility of God it is not possible to draw any
conclusions from analogous statements about God, how the world has to be or
what may happen in it."  
  
Itself philosophical controversial, but not only that, religiously
problematic. Christian theists cannot avail themselves of this kind of
skepticism as much as irreligious theists can. For Christians, God is supposed
to truly be a loving father, and capable of preventing the evils we see in the
world. There is a problem there.

Here as elsewhere, the great St. Augustine sees clearly and speaks frankly
where we moderns deceive ourselves and obfuscate. In chapters 8-10 of [Book
I](https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/120101.htm) of _The City of God_ , he
discusses how and why evil and suffering befall the good as well as the wicked
in this life. As our own age descends into ever deeper moral, political,
social, and economic disorder, we would do well to meditate upon his bracing
teaching. If the faithful believe they will or ought to be spared the brunt of
the punishment that the sins of our civilization are liable to bring down upon
it, they are sorely mistaken. Things are likely to get worse for all of us,
even if only so that divine providence can ultimately bring something better
out of the chaos.

@Walter. I originally became an atheist many years ago mainly because of
suffering. This was as a late teenager, and I came to my own version of God
either being all powerful and cruel, or not all powerful and therefore at
least partly an illusion of primitive people. The fact that I am now a
Catholic is evidence that I don’t think it’s a problem. It’s of course a very
difficult thing, and the argument is not in any way whatsoever that we should
just ignore suffering in others, to be indifferent to it. Quite the opposite,
doing the small bit we can to help those suffering in their different ways is
part of what we are asked to do. This is why I describe it as a necessary part
of our complete creation, and not as a good in itself. Of course us normal
Catholics don’t envy the suffering in others. However those who have the
deepest relationship with God do often become keen to suffer themselves, so
that they can ‘take up their cross’ and share in the sacrifice of God
incarnate.  
  
Once you believe, there is a very different perspective, even if it’s not
always easy from inside the blast furnace of our creation.

In chapter 10, Augustine hammers on the theme that the treasure of Christians
is to be found in heaven and not in any of the goods of this life, and that,
accordingly, no worldly suffering can possibly truly harm them. He writes:

Worse, many Christians deceive themselves into thinking that it is love or
compassion for the sinner that prevents them from condemning these sins too
harshly. In fact, given the grave damage caused by these sins, and the
difficulty so many have in extricating themselves from them, to refrain from
warning others against them is the _opposite_ of compassionate. Yet the
present age is so addicted to them that, of all sins, sexual sins are those
criticism of which puts the critic at greatest danger. People fear for their
reputations, and even livelihoods, if they speak up. Hence, as Augustine says,
“their non-intervention is the result of selfishness, and not of love.”

@Talmid: My condition for the “necessary” is ‘in order to achieve God’s plan’.
We can of course only see that very dimly indeed, but it’s clear that the “new
heaven and earth” will be more like the creation that people who reject God
because of theodicy issues would expect of a good God. No more working in
vain, no more pain of witnessing your children's misfortune. The wolf and the
lamb eat together, even the lion no longer eats other creatures. So it seems
clear to me from revelation that these things are a necessary phase of
creation. When God creates he says it’s “good”, even though He knew it would
contain elements that would not be part of the second creation. Once we were
consciously able to choose between Him and not-Him, we often chose the latter.
However it’s in making this choice correctly when it’s not obvious or easy
that we ‘grow up’, as in we become as our Father intended.  
  
Now I agree with you that we can imagine universes where we would be free and
where we could easily see what is right, where there is no suffering of us or
others to make us ‘loose heart’, and where there are no bright and shiny false
lights with temporary excitement and pleasure. However, like the vines planted
in good, loamy soil, which produce great big bunches of grapes but poor wine,
there is clearly a need for us to struggle a bit in an apparently sub optimal
environment for the creation process to have a successful end point. How God
knows that, we cannot know. Did He tune creation like a quantum experiment,
with all possible realities happening, and from eternity selected the one that
worked best? Or did He just know, because He is infinite and absolute in all
things? I suspect the latter, but the point is that we see a very small part
of the creation process. The people who have the most issue with it nearly
always think the process is complete, and that is their downfall.

@RunDec  
  
Starting from the Christian understanding of evil as "that which is contrary
to nature", what are those evils you see in the world that God has done? And
how could God prevent the evils in the world without also preventing the
wonderful goods that accidentally give rise to them or to which by Divine
mercy they lead? As St. Dionysius wrote "Almighty God knows the evil qua good;
and, with Him, the causes of the evils are powers producing good."  
  
Perhaps you wish there were corruptible natures that could not be corrupted
and passible natures that could not suffer (without seeing the contradiction)
or you wish God Almighty to have limited His power and not created natures
that through their weakness are corruptible and passible, thus preventing such
natures to be actualized and participate in the Good that He is.

(Cont)  
  
Of course, you can argue that the Christian God is evil either according to
Christianity own view of goodness or a diferent view of goodness that is taken
to be objective.  
  
I'am taking care of arguing against the view that God can be seen as evil on
the christian own standards but i admit that this is not much because you
clearly take a diferent view on goodness, seeing your argumentation and being
a vegetarian, so you could aways reply "yea, this god is not evil if we accept
a wrong definition of good". I suppose that this is why you say that
apologists are changing the definition if goodness.  
  
On the christian view, God can be said to do good to us not only in giving us
the chance of Heaven but even in creating we as imperfect as we are. Even
existing badly is better that not existing for being is intrinsically good.
Now, the zoo example and your vegetarianism* show that you disagree with this,
i suppose that being is not good to you on every situation or case and, living
on a world were suffering is so prevalescent, i can see were this come from,
it is a judgment impossible to never make at least for a moment while living
under the sun.  
  
So i think that i see the source of the disagreement here: you and the
christian tradition have diferent views on goodness that change the perception
of this world and the judgment of Goodness Itself making it. To agree with the
christian message you would need a radical change on value that the christian
tradition(at least on your view) need way more evidence to justify.  
  
Anyway, i hope that at least i could make the christian response i'am
defending appear less ad hoc, for i do see it as being internally coherent.
The discussion helped see the disagreement more clearly, thanks! Dont know if
we should go to discussing the accounts of good directly today.  
  
*notice that i have vegetarian sisters and the non-christians i most respect are exactly the spiritualized ascetics that do think other animals have value as well,even if i disagree   
  

@jmchugh:  
  
"It would be easier to understand God's decision to go forward with human
creation if the penalty were limited to the original sinners."  
  
So if you were in God's position, what would you do? The way you are framing
God's judgment is already incorrect, but let us go with it. So jmchugh-as-God
looks into his crystal ball, sees the consequences of the Fall and decides to
*not* create the current world (maybe some other world, maybe no world at
all), in other words, decides *not* to create all the creatures that would
have been created had the Fall happened, including all of us here, including
jmchugh (*).  
  
So in the end, you yourself are not worth the price of the Fall and the cross
and the redemption. Maybe; God certainly thinks otherwise. But I submit that
if some held intellectual position entails our own non-existence, it is
probably a good idea to drop it.  
  
(*) to deny this is to say that possibly, jmchugh could have come into
existence with a different world history (say, different parents). This is
commonly seen as impossible, but good luck with trying to establish it.

@jmchugh  
  
You cannot do penance for the ancestral sin, but you can be cleansed of it by
receiving the holy baptism, and you can do penance for the sins that you
commit after receiving the holy baptism. You are born of blood etc. (John
1:13) in the world of generaton and corruption and "flesh and blood cannot
inherit the kingdom of God; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption." (1
Corinthians 15:50), you are heir and perpetuator of a fallen and sick nature,
unable to redeem itself (Romans 3:9-20), which God Almighty redeems through
our Lord Jesus Christ and the holy Sacraments of His Church. One thing is to
be born of the will (thelema) of man, another of the will (thelema) of God
(John 3).

Simon  
  
Yes, I know some very spoilt children, and that actually proves my point. In
_this_ world (mild) suffering helps us cope with more suffering but that's
only because _this_ world isn't an ideal world. In an ideal world, no
suffering would be required, just as in an ideal world without fires, no fire
brigade is required.  
  
And even if some mild form of suffering would be good for us, it is still a
very big leap to the amounts of grave suffering we see around us.  
  
Instead of referring to Angels, neither of us knows enough about to draw any
conclysions, let's instead look at people.  
Do the majority of people envy the vast suffering of others? Do you eny that.  
Do the majority of people, including most Christians and Catholics try to
relieve the suffering of others or do they say, "Well, in the end, it will
turn out good for them"?  
  
That's why suffering , contrary to what Ed claims, is a huge problem for
Christians. And Christians, deep down, know this, but when they put on their
apologetic hats, they explain it away.

"For my part, I think it's best to honestly acknowledge that some evil in this
world is indeed gratuitous and senseless, and that there are some dark
recesses of the human psyche which God Himself cannot reach: He can console us
while we're in pain, but not while we're in agony, as that severs the
communication channels. In some cases, then, we meet God only on the other
side."  
  
That seems to severely limit omnipotence, and just the divine power in
general. How is it that God cannot help these people in desperate need?
Especially since he's still the creator of all and has to maintain everything
going, to suggest that he cannot stop a torturer in any way or talk to someone
in their moment of agony seems ridiculous.  
  
Even worse, some people are capable of helping those in need and comforting
them in death. But God can't? I can do something that this God can't, like
that? This is not God, this is some type of friendly alien-parent I have no
intention to worship (although I would be interested in still being friends
with him, more as equals)  
  
And if God cannot help these people at that time of need, how could we even
trust him to be able to help them AFTER death? If anything it just makes it
less likely. He wasn't able to do anything when people were alive, now
suddenly he's gonna be able to help them after death? That seems implausible.  
  
What we need is full-blooded rationalist theodicy coupled with skeptical
theism. There are some morally sufficient reasons for why God allows so many
horrors for a finite time here, and they may well be beyond our understanding.
But God must have his reasons, and he also is capable of compensating for
everything in (perhaps) heaven, an infinite afterlife, etc.  
  
Having to hold that there are morally sufficient reasons for all the evil is
certainly a bad cost, but it's still the best cost (at least in my judgment).
Better than limiting God so much or embracing atheism (both seem more
problematic to me)

Sola Scriptura is false, my boy.  
  
Anyway, were in Genesis it is said that the animal natures were changed? The
Fall only results in punishments to humans and to the Serpent.  
  
And about Isaiah, how you know that this verse is not refering to the cease of
wars and fights? If i remembering right it is what he is talking about on the
prior verses and Isaiah uses metaphors to refer to politics Anf war A LOT.  
  

Talmid  
  
Even if I make an exception for Free Choices (and I do this only for the sake
of the argument, let that be clear), it is still a fact that miscarriages are
not the result of Free choices and that the "sexual sin" of contraception,
masturbation and homosexual relations prevents miscarriages from happening.  
Of course, the "apologetic you" does not care about miscarriages because they
are the work of God and God can do whatever He likes, but I do, and so, I am
convinced, does the "non-apologetic you".

That there is a distinction between God willing X and God permiting X and a
distinction between X being the work of God and X being permited by God are
both views defended by probably all christians and that so cant be taken of
granted when doing a critique of christianity internal coherence.

@Simon  
  
Exactly! The problem in the end seems* one of faith, of trusting that God
knows what He is doing even when we dont. He can and does take the good out of
evil, we just do not know how this is so and that is okay.  
  
As St. Augustine shows,we can have some idea of how the bad things are
necessary to the goods on a general sense, but, as he does admit on the book,
how bad things individually have their part only God knows, so in the end we
need to trust.  
  
Walking this path is showing me that a large part of the dificult is exactly
on one relation with God: someone who sees Him as distant or as a idea is more
prone to not being okay with trusting. Bring that together with a focus only
on this life and one will find very dificult to see how God can choose this
world.  
  
Existential considerations seems to me important as well in this debate, and
here the gap between christian and the average non-believer is quite great.  
  
*and i say that as someone who has a dificult with the virtue

Talmid  
  
I don't agree that existing badly is better than not existing. You are arguing
in hindsight. You are glad you exist and so am I, but unless you believe that
all possible creatures are actual or will be actual, most possible creatures
do not exist and will never exist.  
So, Quark the Ferengi Bartender is a fictional character, but, if we take your
view, He will actually exist some day, because, existing badly is better than
not existing. And that holds for every possible creature.  
Notive also how Jesus says that it would have been better for them if they
hadn't been born.  
That much for intrenal consistency.  
  
On a final note, it is not a christian view that God has the right to kill
just because he is God. The whole idea behind the Fall Theodicy was that only
the guilty die and we are all guilty because of the Fall.  
If there had been no Fall, accoding to Tom Cohoe here that is impossible,
butlets look at this hypothetical scenario, God would not have killed anybody
and everybody would be in His presence without fear.  

Vincent, why some people are in anguish and despair when tortured, while
others find themselves in the same state although enjoying all the pleasures
the earth has to offer, is the drama that is human life. It's well-known that
many early Christians gave up the faith when threatened with persecution but
this doesn't detract from the greatness of the sacrifice of so many others. If
one cannot put up a coherent case against the Christian understanding of
suffering, original sin and Redemption, it does not do much good to think
forever and gloomily about suffering. The effort would be better spent
thinking about heaven.  
  
Evil is not "natural" or part of the divine plan. Men deprived of the benefits
of original justice are not in a merely natural state, according to St.
Thomas:  
  
(Ia IIae 109): "We may speak of man in two ways: first, in the state of
perfect nature [state of nature]; secondly, in the state of corrupted nature.
Now in the state of perfect nature, man, without habitual grace, could avoid
sinning either mortally or venially; since to sin is nothing else than to
stray from what is according to our nature - and in the state of perfect
nature man could avoid this... But in the state of corrupt nature man needs
grace to heal his nature in order that he may entirely abstain from sin".

Qualified perfection. Each created thing has a sort of perfection relative to
it, and not beyond that. A newborn colt can be a perfect colt, but not a
perfect horse, because it still needs to grow, get strong, learn how to fend
for itself, etc. A perfect baby is incomplete as a perfect human, needing much
growth, knowledge, and virtue. But a perfect human is still a _creature_ , and
what is perfect to a creature is not the absolute perfection of God. A perfect
creature on this Earth with free will is, _by design_ , able to choose a
lesser good over a greater good, because of being by design a limited
creature, not having absolute perfection like God.

It would be easier to understand God's decision to go forward with human
creation if the penalty were limited to the original sinners. But to continue
the penalty over eons and to this very instant be casting persons into eternal
torment, is really hard to understand.

I actually heard a podcast that was a talk given by the thomistic institute
where they argued something very similar. I remember listening to it about a
year ago but I can't at the moment find the link.

Simon  
  
There is no reason why creatures who do not suffer cannot participate in the
Trinity. In fcat, according to the Fall theodicy, if Adam or Eve (or whoever)
hadn't fallen, they would have partcipated in the Trinity.  
And creatures who do not suffer are not robots and neither are creatures that
do not make evil choices. It's not because I cannot fly all by myself that I
am not a free being.  
And if it is simp;ky a matter of choice, then God could give every creature a
free choice whether or not to participate in the Trinity. No suffering needed
for this.  
  
Repeating a bad theodicy for centuries doesn't make it a good one.  
  
Tom  
  
It just a matter of consistency. Unless something is logically impossible, God
can do it. That's what "omnipotence" means, unless you are going to redefine
that concept as well.  
  
And if i am in need of God's garce and mercy, then it is because of what _I_
do, not because of what some ancestors of mine did or didn't do.  
Some things are actually easy to understand until apologists make them look
difficult because they have no real answers.  

The theodicy problem is meaningless because it is based on contradictory
premises. God is not omnipotent in a potential sense, but in an actual sense:
nothing can exist without him. But because of the incomprehensibility of God
it is not possible to draw any conclusions from analogous statements about
God, how the world has to be or what may happen in it. And God's goodness does
not have its measure in our earthly well-being, but consists in the fact that
we are taken up into the love of the Father for the Son, which is the Holy
Spirit. No power of the world can separate us from God. Thus, faith changes
the our experience of the world because suffering and death no longer have the
last word.  
  

 _but more importantly it’s to claim that this life is all there is_  
  
[This is how I visualize
Epicureanism.](https://futurama.fandom.com/wiki/Hedonismbot)

Well said JM. I work in a hospital ICU. Most of my co-workers are sexually
promiscuous. I am not. Do I criticize their behavior? Never!

Talmid  
  
No, I would not agree to that. You may have "interesting reasons" but what you
need is _good_ reasons. And you haven't got those.

When we wonder why God permits us to suffer even though we try to obey him,
part of the reason is _precisely that we might be saved_. For if we pursue
righteousness only when it is easy to do so, our virtue is bound to be shallow
and unlikely to last. Nor, if the connection between virtuous behavior and
material blessings is too tight, are we likely to pursue the former for the
right reasons. We cannot achieve happiness in the world to come if we become
too attached to the world that is, and suffering is a means of preventing the
latter.

Perhaps you are using "perfect" in a way not intended?  
Eze 28:15 Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day of thy creation, until
iniquity was found in thee.  
Perhaps "perfect" is lacking in no essential detail. Or complete according to
it's nature?

Talmid  
  
"There are certain goods that could only be gained in a world like our own".  
  
That's only true if you stretch the meaning of "goods". Of course we wouldn't
be able to enjoy the "good" of extinguishing a fire in a world in which there
are no fires, but in that world those goods are meaningless.  
The same holds for saints. In an good world, everybody is a saint and
sainthood does not require suffering.  
  
Wha

I think people sometimes take original sin too much like a theory of physics.
Once you do that it can lead to misunderstandings. Perhaps think of it instead
as God creating nature with a telos, in fact a hierarchy of teloi, with
everything drawn towards his divine idea(l)s (using Augustines terms). What
the fall represents is us starting to choose our own sub-teloi, of having
“knowledge” of what is “good” for us. Once we do the conscious choosing, we
generally do a pretty bad job of it, as can be seen immediately with Cain, and
that has consequences that ripple across everything. Like a stone thrown into
a calm pond.  
  
In order to recover our correct place in nature so that we can become
participants in God’s original creation, working with him rather that towards
our own faulty choice of sub-telos, we have to aim towards God’s original
idea(l) of man.  
  
Fortunately He has helped us hugely here. The incarnation was not just(!) the
sacrifice that gained the reconciliation of the consequences of our bad
choices, it also gave us the perfect example of the divine ideal we were
created to be. So in choosing to be more like him, as far as we can in our
puny efforts, we become participants in God’s great act of creation that is
this universe (and we get help in this). On this path even the delights of the
world become good, and we can have life to the full (though not without
suffering yet).  
  
If we don’t - but rather continue to create our own sub-teloi - then even good
intentions can lead us away from completion, away from union with the creator.
For those whose chosen teloi, their highest good and highest desires, are the
base pleasures of the world, it is them who are choosing eternal torment. We
are made to rest in Him, not in base things which will always bring their own
suffering.  
  
I think God spells this all out very clearly in Deuteronomy 30, say verse 11
to the end of the page/chapter.

"If the tree of life was necessary for Adam and Eve to live forever, one might
reasonably ask, did animals have access to the tree of life? The answer seems
to be no.  
  
If the tree of life was unique, it might have been enough for Adam and Eve to
eat from, but it would never have been enough for all of the animals of the
world to eat from. This may be another sign that the animals were not
understood to have the tree of life for their food. If so, then the text of
Genesis itself would suggest that, while man was meant to be immortal, animals
were not. That would support the idea, based on St. Paul’s statement, that it
was human death that entered the world through the Fall, not animal death.  
  
Furthermore, we should note that giving “every green plant” to animals as food
does not mean that some of them weren’t also carnivores. It’s not as if,
before original sin, lions ate dandelions and toadstools and only afterward
did they begin picking on poor old wildebeest. This is something Thomas
Aquinas wrote about in his Summa Theologica:  
  
In the opinion of some, those animals which now are fierce and kill others,
would, in that state, have been tame, not only in regard to man, but also in
regard to other animals. But this is quite unreasonable. For the nature of
animals was not changed by man’s sin, as if those whose nature now it is to
devour the flesh of others, would then have lived on herbs, as the lion and
falcon.  
  
(We should add, lest anyone be tempted to think that this is a forced retreat
in the face of modern evolutionary theory, that Thomas wrote these words
nearly 550 years prior to the birth of Charles Darwin.)"

Why would Original Sin have catastrophic consequences die me?  
I may be guilty of my own sins, but not of those of my ancestors.

This is a good explanation for some suffeing but are there any theories which
provide an explanation for the suffering of young children and animals as this
view doesn't? Also if non- religious people are committing what Catholics view
as serious sins do the persons themselves have any culpability if they do not
see what they are doing as wrong?

Moreover, says Augustine, the difference between a truly righteous man and a
wicked one is often exposed precisely by suffering:

Dr. Feser, thank you for a solid post on suffering.  
  
A few of the comments above have brought up the problem of "animal pain."
While I understand the standard response to that to be something along the
lines of "necessity justified in view of the perfection of creation," I'm
wondering if there is not a richer answer hidden in the back of our tradition.
Specificly, I'm wondering about the role of angels in all this.  
  
Think of something like Tolkien's cosmology - physical evil and disorder
entered into creation when the principalities and powers of the world (The
Valar and Maiar) entered into conflict with each other, one desiring to
fullfill the creators plan to make a habitation for the "children of
illuvitar" (rational life), and others, out to make a dominion for themselves.
As proper "sub-creators," God, in his secondary causality, had given spiritual
beings the duties of care and creation in the physical world, and the flaws,
imperfections, and downright violence of creation were due to the infidelity
of some of the powers intrusted to their care. If we hold the standard line
that fallen angels fell in the first instant of their creation, and, further,
that they had been, nevertheless, been given dominion over certain parts or
aspects of creation, then Johanine language about the "lord of this world,"
and Pauline language about the "princes of the powers of the air," makes a lot
more sense, and can even be joined to an evolutionary cosmology.  
  
The universe is an odd place, and the creation of the conditions for life, let
alone rational life, in an odd, (physically fallen?) cosmos could be seen as
the fruit of angelic conquest over malign forces. Furthermore, evolution
itself might be seen as being helped along or guided by forces trying to bring
about God's will in creation.  
  
This sounds fantasic, even as I write it, but I'm wondering if anyone else has
explored this train of thought.

@grodrigues  
  
The point of the questions I thought were obvious. I'm wondering if you can
conceive of why someone would ask the questions. You've evidenced no
understanding of why someone would broach the questions I have. And, yes, they
are rational concerns.  
  
You say: "How the hell should I know what I would think if I were a completely
different person in completely different circumstances?"  
  
Undoubtedly you have heard of "putting yourself in someone else's shoes." It's
a very important skill not just in apologetics but in life.  
  

Miguel  
  
Essentialy good natures always choose what is right. A perfect nature cannot
corrupt itself. Otherwise it wasn't perfect to begin with.

@Walter  
  
Do i not? One of the classical responses a theist make to the problem of evil
is to say "there are certain goods that could only be gained in a world like
our own". Even platonists argue that.  
  
Well, the christian does have the example of the saints, whose suffering and
hardships make their lifes noble and interesting* not only to us but even to
themselves. To a christian, suffering is supposed to be seen not as a crappy
thing, but as a way of uniting with Christ and climbing the latter to being
similar to Him.  
  
Not only on they but on normal people, perhaps even on your case, you can see
people who look at terrible times they had and see their better situation as
enobled or even justified by the bad times. This even on totally secular
contexts, not considering the beatific vision(who would turn everything
acceptable to the receiver).  
  
This actually seems probably a very alien thinking to a modern unbeliever,
except that Nietzsche did get there, so read eventually the start of the City
of God, the part that Dr. Feser is quoting, slowly and trying to see things
like St. Augustine. Perhaps it help. Likely not, for it is quite a jump.  
  
And remember: this is not a way to us to see this world as justified, but a
way to trying to see how God could see things that way. The same God that do a
lot of things we humans cant do, like kill people and all that.  
  
But anyway, trying to grow on this worldview i realized that the christians
and a average person today, even several theists, see the relevant things with
completely diferent eyes, so who knows how much this discussion can do.
Existential considerations are very important.  
  
*which is not to argue that becoming good by suffering is necessarily better than starting good. In the christian context God created humans and angels, who represent both options

No. This post is not saying that.  
  
You have a duty to be concerned for her welfare, including her eternal good.
You are still left with a **prudential judgment** of weighing and balancing
the goods that you can bring about through saying something about sexual
morality (along with the evils that will be borne thereby) with the goods you
can do by _other_ actions (and the evils that will be borne thereby).

A good question. In line with what one of the Anonymi posted above,
Augustine's rather bifurcative analysis would seem to classify your boss among
"the wicked" and the employee who denounces her to her face for her SSM as
among "the good."

@jmchugh:  
  
"Thus, in the act of creating certain individuals, God, by the same act, is
condemning them to eternal torment."  
  
You are using imprecise language. We are Catholics here, not calvinists;
people condemn themselves.  
  
So what you are saying is in fact, that is better to not exist at all than to
exist and be condemned; I never asked him, but if you have the chance to ask
the devil, who condemned himself of his own free-will and is condemned for all
eternity, if he prefers to exist and be condemned to not exist at all; I am
pretty sure I know what is the answer he would give.  
  
"Yes, if I were the creator I would not create a person who would enter a
fallen world of suffering, who would eventually die and be tormented forever.
Why would I do that to someone I love?"  
  
So you would much rather they do not exist at all, and all the good that
*their* existence would bring about, not come into existence at all. So if you
have say, a direct ancestor that is condemned you would rather that God had
not brought him to existence, and thus not bring you to existence, than bring
him to existence and allow him to fall. And you call this "loving"? Right.

@Walter  
  
Fair response. But would you not agree that the at minimum creative role that
suffering has on christianity weaken the problem of evil? For we do have
interesting reasons for it to exist.

@Walter  
  
I was sure i placed my name there, strange. But i'am the Anon.  
  
Anyway, my post only established that:  
  
\- If Simon view is true, the fall is not a necessary truth on the sense that
2 + 2 = 4 is  
  
\- If Simon view is true, man could be guilty of the fall  
  
I'am sure it is clear that my actual views in Simon position are irrelevant.  
  
@Simon  
  
I agree with what you are trying to say, at least the message. The details?
Probably not*, but it is true, as living this life can say, that one cant know
God plans except if He reveals something(which He does do on a very small
scale to the one who is listening, but not on a way that would be useful to
this debate)  
  
  
*There probably could be a world were all rational creatures choosed God, but this world would lack some features our own has like conflict, grow in virtue, some virtues like empathy and courage etc, so our own was choosen

Simon  
  
"I think there are even simpler examples where the suffering is so mild that
we don’t often call it suffering, such as going for a run every week".  
That's because of how we evolved. We evolved in a world that contains
suffering and we evolved means to cope with that suffering, and indeed, in
this world, mild suffering can, in the long run, avoid more serious suffering.
if I don't go for a bike ride today, even though the weather isn't very good
here and the ride will not be all pleasant, I could lose my shape, which could
lead to a lot more suffering.  
Notice that the main goal is to _avoid_ serious suffering, not to cherish it.  
That's like the fire brigade. It is a good, but it is only relative. if there
were no possible fires, a fire brigade would not be a good. If God didn't
create a world of suffering for us, suffering (even mild suffering) would not
be a good.

Walter  
  
“ No, suffering is not a necessary part of our creation unless your claim is
that the fall was necessary.  
The point of the Fall is that man and not God is responsible for the Fall, but
nobody can be responsible for a necessary truth. that would be like saying you
are responsible for why 1 + 1 = 2.”  
  
Again, I think this is treating spiritual truth a bit like Newton’s laws of
motion. The fall is a spiritual fall, it’s when spiritual death first
appeared. Death can be seen as disintegration, but the modern, protestant,
literalist mind always assumes this to be physical. Do you really think no
creatures died before Adam and Eve ate the fruit?  
  
Remember also that Lucifer fell from heaven before Adams fall. There is a far
larger canvas here than just Adam and Eve eating something. Creating free,
rational beings seems to inevitably result in at least some of them failing in
terms if pride, and therefore obedience. If it’s not inevitable, it’s at least
the case in Gods perfect plan for creation.  
  
I do however also think that the fall was necessary at some point. We are each
created unique. Some of us are like the prodigal son, and some more like his
brother. There are lessons the Father wants both types to learn as part of the
process of our creation that is this life. Without the ‘fall’ of the prodigal
son, there is no opportunity for either brother to make the right choice to
align with the father. Just as the creation of our bodies was via a process of
ongoing refinement through suffering, our reconciliation with God is a
partaking in the redemptive suffering of God as son of man. It’s of course
true that man caused our fall. But God’s plan, from a perspective we can’t
even imagine yet, is perfect. Nothing has gone wrong. Bizarre as that may seem
to us at times in the middle of it, I believe this to be true.  
  

@Walter  
  
On a modal sense yea. But God conservation of me while i type and my typing
are not the same act.  
  
For instance, when i drink water using a cup the cup "action" of containg the
water is necessary to me to drink it on the way i'am drinking, but my action
of drinking is my own thing.

Simon  
  
Participating in the Trinity "inspires an awe and fear that is well beyond
normal human experience" if God creates the normal human experience in such a
way. And that is the point, a good God who cares about His creation would
create every conscious being with the ability to be in His presence without so
much awe and fear. Why would a good being even inspire fear on anyone?  
This "awe and fear" thing is a projection of emotions inspired by human
leaders who indeed ruled by awe and fear. it is also inspired by theodicies
that existed from very near the beginning, and it also inspired lots of Saints
with a (IMO) perverse attarction to suffering. Sure, most Saints believed and
still believe that suffering is necessary for unity with God for the same
reason that you believe it.  
But that doesn't make those reasons any good.

Tom  
  
If logic is contingent, so is God, because the proposition "God exists" is, in
that case, a contingent truth.  
  
If free will can be expressed in unbiased bits, then there is no choice,
whatever happens is just the result of random factors. Your account of free
will means that you can turn into an atheist tomorrow and I can turn into a
theist, because that happens to be an unbiased bit of both our "wills".  
If you are given an infinite amount of time, you will become an atheist and a
theists again and an atheist again and a theist again etc. and the result is
you will never be either of them or you will be both of them.

There is no verse 33 in the first chapter of the Book of Genesis of the Bible
( at least in my version of the Bible). The first text you quote is also from
Isaiah(11:6). Next time, look for some better atheist website that actually
quotes from the Bible (the actual one) and be more honest.  
Also, notice both of the passages you cited are in future tense; if it was
really about the event in the garden of Eden, it would have been in past
tense. And FYI, both of the passages are about the new heaven and new earth.  
Funny, you atheists often accuse Christians of looking at the Bible through
the apologist 's lenses, as if those of the atheist are any better; but as it
happens, you have to resort to lies to prove the Scripture wrong.

 _If God knew the catastrophic consequences of original sin (and he did know)
why did he create man in the first place?_  
  
Because creating man was good? Is that not a reason? To be more specific:
Because creating creatures able to know and love God is a _very great good_.  
  
_It seems self-defeating and cruel._  
  
The good of a good act is not SIMPLY canceled by evil of a later pain
suffered. The good act is (and remains) _a good_.  
  
There are different **orders** of good, as well: The good of an act of charity
is not of the same order of good as the good of health, nor of the evil of
pain and illness, the act of charity is in principle a higher-order good that
cannot be canceled by pain and suffering.  
  
The _degree_ of evil of an act of malice does reside in the same order as the
degree of good of an act of love. But the good that X agent does is not
canceled out by the evil that Y agent does.  
  
If you want to know whether there is, on balance, more good in the acts of
love in the world, than evil in the acts of malice, the answer is easy: there
is more good in the acts of love. Christ's salvific act of obedience to the
Father exceeds in goodness all the malice of all the acts of other persons.

Talmid  
  
I do not necessarily reject the idea that being and goodness are the same, but
if that's so, being should be good and not be bad in any way. It doesn't
suffice that every being has "some" good, no, being "is" good.  
Hence, there cannot be anything bad. And that's the crux of the problem and
that's why the Classical Theism isn't consistent.  
To say that even bad things should exist is simply logically impossible "if"
being is good. That's a straightforward contradiction.  
  
Sure, if an infinite multiverse exists, then somewhere, Quark the Ferengi
exists. That may not be an insane idea, but it is not the standard Christian
view, which is that God could have chosen not to create anything at all.  
Your claim about qualitative and quantitative maximization is interesting
here, because it contradicts what you claimed before, namely that "being is
intrinsically good". if being is intrinsically good, then not being is
intrinsically bad, so Quark the Ferengi not existing would be intrinsically
bad. Whether my "type" of goodness exists in someone else doesn't make my non-
existence a good thing.  
  
BTW, Abraham and Isaac came after the Fall, so Isaac was not innocent. Neither
is any foetus in the womb, because they have all  
inherited Original Sin.  
I do not really care about how many Chrurch Fathers agree of disagree with me,
actually. A bad argument is bad, no matter how many Chruch fathers or other
people present it.  
  
Now, I think I have said enough on the subject. My conclusion still is that
suffering is a huge problem for Christianity. And I have explained why.  
  
Now, thank you for the interesting discussion, Talmid.

Talmid  
  
i have already explained why the action of drinking cannot be your own action
if it's true that nothing can exist for even an intstant without God actively
creating and sustaining it.

Tony  
If creating man is good, then creating Klingons Romulans and Cardassians and
Ferengi is also good.  
Do you believe God also created those species?

There are many horrendous evils that a loving father God should prevent/stop,
and should be able to. For example, many cases of horrendous suffering caused
by some diseases; sexual abuse and torture; etc. The list could go on and on.
And Christians do believe that God does, in fact, sometimes prevent or stop
said evils through (for example) miracles or providence. So it is a problem
why there are still so many of these evils going on and our loving Father does
nothing about it - not even when people desperately or earnestly pray and beg
him for help.  
  
"And how could God prevent the evils in the world without also preventing the
wonderful goods that accidentally give rise to them or to which by Divine
mercy they lead?"  
  
I do not know with certainty that God could do that. But it does seem like
there are many cases of seemingly gratuitous, horrible evil - which God should
therefore prevent or stop. And again, Christians do believe that God does that
in some cases, too (either through miracle or providence). So the problem
seems pressing to me.  
  
I believe in God, so in the end I do think that there is some greater good
that is achieved with God not-intervening, or allowing this universe to just
be full of suffering and horror for some time, etc. I hope there is a morally
sufficient reason for it all and that the Form of the Good (God) is not so
distant from our love, hopes and needs. But this is a serious epistemic cost -
because when I look at the world, it does seem like there are purely
gratuitous horrendous evils, or that God should be doing better, and so on.
It's a bad epistemic cost, one that I wish I could avoid, and it makes me
think that some people truly are reasonable in their position of atheism. I
personally just happen to find theism to be harder to deny, rationally
speaking, so I think it offsets the problem of evil in the end. But I think
it's a serious problem and we don't have a simple solution to it either in
philosophy or religion.  
  

Tom  
  
If you say that the proposition "God exists" is a necessary truth you are
applying a procedure that by your own admission you cannot apply.  
So, that makes every attempt to use logic to argue for God completely futile.  
  
Hence, to be consistent,you would have to go with Richard Swinburne and admit
that "God is necessary" cannot be proven and therefore we should consider god
to be contingent.  
  
  
Your second part shows what exactly is wrong with free will theodicies. If,
given a finite amount of time, I will arrive at a point when death ends the
process, then it is simply a matter of random chance. Maybe just before i die,
I "happen" to become a theist. Result: eternal happiness, while you, just
before you die, after having lead an entire life as a devout Catholic,
"happen" to become an atheist. back luck for you.  
  
And that's why the Fall theodicy is so incredibly weak, and had better be
named "the Trap theodicy", because it seems that God has waited just long
enough for the first time Adam did something wrong to condemn him. Moreover,
since he was the one who put the sequence there in the first place, He knew
exactly what was going to happen and when it was going to happen.  
IOW, Adam, just like the rest of us, was always doomed and has always been in
need of redemption. There was no fall, Human beings were created fallen right
from the start.  
And because they were created that way, whatever happened afterwards was
ineviteble.  

It's not even obvious to me that we aren't making a category error by using
the term suffering univocally between humans and animals. Since we definitely
don't think (unless we're PETA weirdos) that we can apply concepts like
justice to animas in the same way that we apply it to humans, and that
suffering necessarily includes some component of injustice, I don't think
we've clearly defined what sorts of pain they animals experience ought to
properly qualify as suffering in a sense relevant to this discussion.

@ Walter Van den Acker,  
  
BTW, I do not treat God as contingent in any sense of the word.  
  
Tom Cohoe

@Talmid. Well said. As an ex-atheist, I know that whether you believe in God
as the ground of being (as all real believers do), versus considering Him as
“a being” (as most atheists do) affects so much of your perspective. It’s not
a fact among other facts. The reality is more like our understanding is a
wall, with boxed up bricks of conclusions. As humans we find it difficult to
look at the contents of more than one brick at a time. From an evolutionary
perspective this is understandable. When you need food, or there is a lion at
the cave entrance, you don’t want to be thinking about ways to make clothes,
how the sun moves through the sky etc. In the modern world the foundations of
the wall tend to be physics, chemistry, maths, geology, economics, politics
etc, which themselves have foundations built on a reduction to small things
(pebbles). Once you believe in God, that is always the foundation stone. To me
this is why literalist, fundamentalist protestants have such a problem with
science, but that’s a different subject. However it’s also why people find the
conversion experience so shocking, as you realise your wall of understanding
is in many cases upside down.  
  
In terms of your asterisk point, have you tried spending an hour a week in
silent Eucharistic meditation? Just hand over your questions/concerns, and see
what help you get over time. I think this is a great gift that we don’t use
enough. If we could see it as it is, we could charge good money for it, and
adoration sessions would be full!

WCB  
  
Genesis 1:33 claims God created all animals vegetarians  
  
The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with
the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a
little child shall lead them.  
7 And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down
together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.  
  
See also Isaiah 65. With the prophecied coming of God's holy mountain, there
will be no animal predation and suffering. So animal predation and suffering
were not original in God's magic garden, nor are necessary now. If such
suffering exists, then it is not necessary and is all God's fault.  
  
Why? What is God waiting for? Maybe if all Christians prayed to God daily to
fulfil his promises in Isaiah he might relent?  
  
WCB  

[By Man Shall His Blood Be Shed: A Catholic Defense of Capital Punishment
(with Joseph M. Bessette)](https://www.amazon.com/Man-Shall-His-Blood-
Shed/dp/1621641260/ref=pd_sim_14_6?_encoding=UTF8&pd_rd_i=1621641260&pd_rd_r=9SQGPQ0HAX9Y392GRR12&pd_rd_w=yz0mr&pd_rd_wg=zFiiQ&psc=1&refRID=9SQGPQ0HAX9Y392GRR12)

Not sure if Ed will allow it but here's the new Classical Theism online
community for anyone that wants to help revive it :)  
  
https://discord.gg/qJ82CKth

Here Augustine teaches that it is not enough to refrain from the sins of
wicked men. The Christian must also _criticize them_ for their wickedness, and
try to get them to repent of it. To be sure, Augustine goes on to acknowledge
that there may be occasions where one might justifiably opt to postpone such
criticism until an opportune moment, or refrain from it out of a reasonable
fear of doing more harm than good. But he teaches here that it is _not_
justifiable to refrain from such criticism merely because it is difficult, or
because we fear causing offense and losing friends, or because we don’t want
to risk losing status or other worldly goods. For the wicked are in danger _of
damnation_ if they do not repent, and we “wickedly blind ourselves” if we
shirk our duty to encourage them to do so. Even if we avoid damnation
ourselves, we will justly suffer alongside them when divine providence visits
_this-worldly_ punishments upon them (social and economic disorder, natural
disasters, and the like).

It's not necessary to remind us of the definition of a metaphor, WCB. Now
answer the question.

Talmid: “ Notice that even we can see value in something that requires
suffering. For instance, would you rather we, suppose we could, put all savage
animals in zoos…”  
  
I think there are even simpler examples where the suffering is so mild that we
don’t often call it suffering, such as going for a run every week (assuming
like me you don’t particularly like running, but like the end results). Or
vacuuming the house, packing the dishwasher etc.  
  
For many reasons we usually consider these to be categorically different from
suffering. We choose to do them, the downsides are very mild, the benefits are
obvious and immediate etc. However in principle they are very similar. They
are also similar in that the more we learn to accept them - even to try
inwardly celebrate the service we are giving to the final cause, the less they
become problems.

@ Walter Van den Acker,  
  
The little logic puzzles that you are setting are tricks that you are playing
on yourself.  
  
"If logic is contingent, so is God, because the proposition 'God exists' is,
in that case, a contingent truth."  
  
Contingent logic and contingent truth are not the same thing. Logic is a
procedure that, properly used, takes us from one truth to another. Contingent
truth is not absolute truth. "It takes an hour to swim across the lake",
depends on the lake, the person swimming, and other contingent factors. God
knows all the contingencies. They are in the infinite sequence which is
contingent to us, but not to God, who is absolute truth. Furthermore, the
infinite sequence is an _image_ of God, a Divine Idea, meaning that God knows
it. But an image of God is not God any more than the pixels in your digital
photo of a tree are the tree. You cannot say that the tree does not have sap
because the photo does not have sap. Similarly, you cannot say that God is
contingent from the entertainment of an image of God. The image does not show
what God is, but it shows what you cannot say that God is not. Because people,
made in the image of God, can be stupid does not imply that God is stupid.  
  
God has no procedure of using logic. God knows the procedure of logic that you
use. He created it. That procedure, properly used, is whatever God wills it to
be. Whatever he wills it to be, it still allows humans to reason from one
contingent truth to another within the composite contingent truths that humans
understand.  
  
"Your account of free will means that you can turn into an atheist tomorrow
and I can turn into a theist, because that happens to be an unbiased bit of
both our 'wills.' "  
  
Interesting then that that can actually happen but only a finite number of
times before death ends the process. Infinite time in paradise ends when the
inevitable free will choice to turn away from God is made. "To dust you shall
return" [RSV2CE]. It is like a mouse who freely steps onto a trap door and
falls from the paradise into a pit from which it cannot exit except through
death in finite time. But death, because of God's love, is actually another
door to eternal salvation.  
  
Tom Cohoe

@Walter  
  
"And as for the distinction between God willing X and God permitting X and a
distinction between X being the work of God and X being permitted by God,
there can be no such distinction is it's true that nothing would exist for
even an instant if God did not actively sustain it.  
Anybody who holds that view and still argues for the distinction is simply
contradicting himself. So, his view is not internally coherent."  
  
Only if you believe that a form of Occasionalism is true, which is hardly a
christian view. Once you separate God action of keeping things existing from
the effects caused by creatures on other creatures there is a easy separation
between allowing creatures to do things and doing the things.

WCB  
  
@Talmid  
"Anyway, were in Genesis it is said that the animal natures were changed? The
Fall only results in punishments to humans and to the Serpent."  
  
Genesis 1:30  
30 And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every
thing that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there is life, I have given every
green herb for meat: and it was so.  
  
So originally animals were vegetarians. Many animals are obligate carnivores,
and have been so since multicelluar animals involved.  
  
"Sola scripture Badddd!", yeah baby. That isn't a counter argument, now is
it.? Council of Trent - Fourth Session and Verbum Dei - 1965 tell us God
authored the Bible dogmaticallyy. If so you are stuck with Genesis 1:30.  
Can you point to any official mmagistereum dogma that explicitly claims
Genesis 1:30 is false?This is what is so fun about debating doctrinaire
Christians. Buzzword and rationalization.  
  
WCB

I'am reading the City of God right now and this part really did struck me as
very well thought. St. Augustine point that, unlike the roman deities, God
does not promise to give us what we want on this life is sure a very important
truth to remember not only on the implicit relevance to the problem of evil it
has but also on a existential level on the christian life. The fact that he
writed that while seeing all that disaster and pain while did not knowing if
he was gonna suffer it as well is sure a very interesting detail.  
  
And the censuring of cowardly christians is sure a very actual part. How much
of a temptation is to just never direct comdenm our new pagan Rome!  
  
Sadly, most of the christians you thinked about, Dr. Feser, especially at the
clergy, perhaps would not even do the "be virtuous personaly" part...  
I know this is a problem here!

@Talmid  
  
"Miscarriages are truly bad, my man, i cant argue against that."  
  
I don't know if a miscarriage is worse than a mentally impaired child ever
incapable of manifesting even the cognitive abilities of an ape or than a
child who would do the most filthy sins in life without ever repenting.

You can't use evil and suffering to "prove" to Christians that God doesn't
exist. They will just respond that the reality ot evil and suffering is
mystery that we mortals will not comprehend until we are in the presence of
God. How can you reply to that?

Tom  
  
So, according to you, it is possible to inevitably choose something?  
I suppose that makes sense to someone who treats logic (and God) as
contingent.

Now, so far Augustine is addressing suffering that is unmerited. But there is
also suffering that good men can merit and bring upon themselves, as Augustine
explains in chapter 9. This is so in several ways. First, of course, nobody’s
perfect. Even those who avoid the more blatant violations of Christian
morality still typically exhibit moral failings of various lesser kinds:

_They should endure all torment, if need be, for Christ's sake; that they
might be taught to love Him rather who enriches with eternal felicity all who
suffer for Him, and not silver and gold, for which it was pitiable to suffer,
whether they preserved it by telling a lie or lost it by telling the truth.
For under these tortures no one lost Christ by confessing Him... So that
possibly the torture which taught them that they should set their affections
on a possession they could not lose, was more useful than those possessions
which, without any useful fruit at all, disquieted and tormented their anxious
owners_.

It is true that there is no verse 33 in Genesis 1.  
In geneis 1:29-30; however, it is said "29 Then God said, “I give you every
seed-bearing plant on the face of the whole earth and every tree that has
fruit with seed in it. They will be yours for food. 30 And to all the beasts
of the earth and all the birds in the sky and all the creatures that move
along the ground—everything that has the breath of life in it—I give every
green plant for food.” And it was so."  
  

"One of the best contemporary writers on philosophy" _National Review_  
  
"A terrific writer" Damian Thompson, _Daily Telegraph_  
  
"Feser... has the rare and enviable gift of making philosophical argument
compulsively readable" Sir Anthony Kenny, _Times Literary Supplement_  
  
Selected for the _First Things_ list of the 50 Best Blogs of 2010 (November
19, 2010)  

@rodrigues. Thanks. I think we are talking at each other a little bit though.  
  
My question been about the logic of Christian theodicy. For example why did
God create Satan if he knew that this devil would lead a rebellion with such
horrific consequences?  
  
Your reply has been that existence is worth it and that the way God did it led
eventually to my own existence.  
  
But that is only true if we assume that the only alternative is your view of
what happened or my non-existence.  
  
My suggestion is not my non-existence as being preferable but rather that your
view of what happened is incorrect because it is implausible.

Tom  
  
I understand you have lots of things on your mind, so. I give you the time to
correct all of the contradiction before I Respond.

@Walter  
  
"I don't agree that existing badly is better than not existing."  
  
Correct, i think that this is were the disagreement lies. Materials beings
like, say, cats, are by nature corruptive, they can be hurt, cease to be and
even suffer and die. Now, is these beings existence good enough that they are
desirable?  
  
You answer "not necessarily" for, from what i remember, you reject the ur-
platonist view that being and goodness are the same, so your criteria of what
a good thing is probably(i can only supose) tied to happiness in a way that
unhappiness in a large level is not the type of thing that should be desirable
at all.  
  
By contrast, someone like Aquinas would argue that even beings so fragile are
desirable for their existence allow for a major variety of good things and
even their decay and corruption is in a sense, and only in a sense, desirable
for the corruption of one material thing aways result in other things(even if
not usually living) and so ad variety.  
  
Remember that later pagans and ancient and medieval christians took effort to
argue against the gnostic view that the material world is bad because of the
inevitable corruption and decay its existence creates, which seems alive on
today antinatalists, so the view i'am defending does argue that even beings
that can and do suffer and die are good. The realism on universals, evil as
privation and "being = goodness" aspects are essencial to this to work, so
i'am not suprised that you are not convinced. The disagreement on metaphysics
is anything but irrelevant here, but it just is the cause of the disagreement.  

jmchugh  
  
That's an understatement. It is not "hard to understand" , it is absolutely
incompatible with God's alleged goodness and justice.  
Unless of course, for apologetic reasons, you keep redefining "goodness" and
"justice" until it fits what you want, which is what has happened right from
the start.

Talmid  
  
 _"So the idea that God is good yes but on a more analogical than univocal way
is not a clever apologetical invention but is there on the religions of the
book since the beginning."_  
  
I know that in was in the books since the beginning, but that has been my
point all along. From the beginning, contrary to what Ed claims, suffering was
a problem and hence, from the beginning, there was a a need for theodicies.  
God may be good in only an analogous way, but an analogy has something in
common with what it is compared to, and your definition of goodness is
contrary to what is generally understood by goodness. What is more important
is that I think you are a good person and that in everyday life you use the
same definition of goodness that I do.  
And on that definition of goodness, every possibilty of evil would be ruled
out if that were possible. But yiurb definition of god's goodness is simply
circular "Good is what God does and whatever god does is good".  
  
It is indeed so that the Christian good is not all good in any meaningful
sense, not just not in the sense that we are but in no sense at all.  
Using people and their suffering as a means to get a more attractive creation
is not good in any meaningful sense. It is, in every meaingful sense,
appalling.  
  
The very fact that God also created saints that did not suffer is proof that,
contrary to what some of you claim, God could do it. It's just that he was
apparently more attracted to a world with suffering.  
I know you didn't mean to, but "their place in the game" says it all. I don't
want to be part of a game, and I don't think Pure Act plays games.  
  
  
  

@grodrigues  
  
Before anyone is even conceived God knows their eternal destination. Thus, in
the act of creating certain individuals, God, by the same act, is condemning
them to eternal torment. He is creating people he knows will abjectly fail and
be tormented for eternity. Yes, if I were the creator I would not create a
person who would enter a fallen world of suffering, who would eventually die
and be tormented forever. Why would I do that to someone I love?

_What is blame-worthy is, that they who themselves revolt from the conduct of
the wicked, and live in quite another fashion, yet spare those faults in other
men which they ought to reprehend and wean them from; and spare them because
they fear to give offense, lest they should injure their interests in those
things which good men may innocently and legitimately use – though they use
them more greedily than becomes persons who are strangers in this world, and
profess the hope of a heavenly country_.

We were created in time, for eternity. We had to ‘fall’ into knowledge of good
and evil, so that we could consciously choose good, even when it’s difficult.
Maybe that happened before we were ready for it, and maybe if we had not
disobeyed him things would be very different. But suffering is a very
necessary part of our creation (even if you only look at our evolution). To
deny that we should have been created at all because of suffering is not only
to deny goodness or beauty in existence, but more importantly it’s to claim
that this life is all there is. If you think this life is all there is, why
are you even interested in why God did anything at all?

Walter,  
  
Yes, they are. You list all of his reasons for why.

If God knew the catastrophic consequences of original sin (and he did know)
why did he create man in the first place? It seems self-defeating and cruel.

Talmid  
  
To answer your question.  
Yes, I would, if I could and was smart enough to know how (which would make me
omniscient), put all savage animals in zoos and other controlated environments
and make the ecosystems that exist now stay functioning artificially.  
That's one of the reasosn I am a vegetarian, by the way.  
You only need "the good" of a fire brigade if there can be fires. So, no, I
wouldn't allow fires because I wanted the good of a fire brigade.

@jmchugh:  
  
"You are absolutely certain that your religion's story of the creation and
fall is true. I hold no such certainty."  
  
I have as much certainty that it is true as you have certainty that it is
false. Your original question was framed as an alleged *contradiction*, you
even used the words "self-defeating and cruel". Now you are changing tack in
the middle of the conversation? At any rate, you have not found any fault with
my arguments; your problem is just that they do not answer every question that
you might reasonably ask -- I can live with that as I was not trying to answer
every such reasonable question.

Hi Ed,  
  
You write:  
  
As Augustine says, there isn’t “any evil [that] happens to the faithful and
godly which cannot be turned to profit,” so that, with St. Paul, “we know that
all things work together for good to them that love God” (Romans 8:28).  
  
I have to say that Augustine's remark sounds very Pollyanna-ish. There are
some evils which can only be described as soul-breaking, rather than soul-
making. Three which come to mind are rape, mutilation and torture. These are
horrendous sufferings which serve no "greater good," and which can destroy
even a good individual's faith, as the following account of the 17th century
"torture in the pit" illustrates:  
  
https://sspx.org/en/news-events/news/real-life-silences-character  
  
There were priests, many of them good men, who apostasized. What good was
served?  
  
You also cite Augustine to support the following claim: "We cannot achieve
happiness in the world to come if we become too attached to the world that is,
and suffering is a means of preventing the latter."  
  
This might explain some of the suffering that befalls adults, but it fails to
explain the death and suffering of a child, who has no worldly attachments.  
  
Finally, original sin (or the fall of Adam) is said to be the ultimate
explanation for why humans are permitted to suffer and die, rather than
enjoying immortality and bliss. I am not persuaded that a dumb choice by a
distant ancestor makes it fair for us to be allowed to suffer soul-breaking
evils of the sort described above, but let that pass. What original sin cannot
explain is the fact that people (e.g. political prisoners, psychiatric
patients) have been beaten or tortured to death, while screaming for Divine
deliverance or at least some Divine consolation (i.e. a sense of "I am with
you") at the moment of death, and in many cases, it never arrives: they die in
agony and desolation. Spiritual abandonment at the hour of death is the most
difficult evil of all to make sense of, and if you can make any sense of it,
Ed, you're a better man than I.  
  
For my part, I think it's best to honestly acknowledge that some evil in this
world is indeed gratuitous and senseless, and that there are some dark
recesses of the human psyche which God Himself cannot reach: He can console us
while we're in pain, but not while we're in agony, as that severs the
communication channels. In some cases, then, we meet God only on the other
side. Cheers.

@ Walter Van den Acker,  
  
I'll stick with what I wrote.  
  
Tom Cohoe

Augustine is especially hard on Christians (such as clergy) who do not have
family obligations and the like to worry about, yet still shrink from doing
their duty to condemn the wickedness that surrounds them:

Miscarriages are truly bad, my man, i cant argue against that.  
  
But pay attention to the cup example, for the primary/secundary distinction is
important here. All it can do is adress the "work of God" objection and not
the whole problem of evil, though.

The consequence, Augustine teaches, is that many sinners who might have
repented had they been warned will end up damned as a result. And those who
failed to warn them will suffer at least temporal punishments along with them,
because they were too attached to the comforts of this life to help others
prepare for the next. Augustine writes:

"Please explain how coitus and miscarriages are "the work of God" and how it's
possible for man to prevent Almighty God from working."  
  
According to Ed Feser, nothing would exist for even an instant if God did not
actively sustain it.  
So, miscarriages are the work of God. The only things that might be considered
not the work of God would be libertarian free willed decisions.  
  
And if Almighty God exists, man can't prevent Him from working, whether he
works through miscarriages or abortions, if He wants an unborn baby to die, it
dies. But that's all there is to it.  
Why is it a abortion considered a grave evil. it is simply what God wants.  
  
And as for the distinction between God willing X and God permitting X and a
distinction between X being the work of God and X being permitted by God,
there can be no such distinction is it's true that nothing would exist for
even an instant if God did not actively sustain it.  
Anybody who holds that view and still argues for the distinction is simply
contradicting himself. So, his view is not internally coherent.

_Wherefore, though good and bad men suffer alike, we must not suppose that
there is no difference between the men themselves, because there is no
difference in what they both suffer. For even in the likeness of the
sufferings, there remains an unlikeness in the sufferers; and though exposed
to the same anguish, virtue and vice are not the same thing. For as the same
fire causes gold to glow brightly, and chaff to smoke… so the same violence of
affliction proves, purges, clarifies the good, but damns, ruins, exterminates
the wicked. And thus it is that in the same affliction the wicked detest God
and blaspheme, while the good pray and praise. So material a difference does
it make, not what ills are suffered, but what kind of man suffers them_.

_Accordingly this seems to me to be one principal reason why the good are
chastised along with the wicked, when God is pleased to visit with temporal
punishments the profligate manners of a community. They are punished together,
not because they have spent an equally corrupt life, but because the good as
well as the wicked, though not equally with them, love this present life;
while they ought to hold it cheap, that the wicked, being admonished and
reformed by their example, might lay hold of life eternal... For so long as
they live, it remains uncertain whether they may not come to a better mind.
These selfish persons have more cause to fear than those to whom it was said
through the prophet, _He is taken away in his iniquity, but his blood will I
require at the watchman's hand (Ezekiel 33:6).

@ Walter Van den Acker,  
  
"it is possible to inevitably choose something?"  
  
Yes Walter. In the temporal paradise nothing would end it except a voluntary
exit (freely choosing to turn away from the presence of God). So an infinitude
of time was available, unmarred by fear, aging, or death.  
  
Now let us look at the simple model of human free will in time (in the
temporal paradise) - an infinite sequence of unbiased bits, in which lies all
possible intelligible choices encoded one way or other (you, Walter, can
choose any encoding method subject to finite computation).  
  
To be unbiased, the infinite sequence would have to contain, as a subsequence,
the choice to turn away from God (exit paradise). If the infinite sequence did
not contain the choice as a subsequence, the infinite sequence would not be an
unbiased random sequence and it would not be simple but would be complex.  
  
So the free choice to turn from God, given endless time, is inevitable.  
  
"I suppose that makes sense to someone who treats logic (and God) as
contingent."  
  
Logic can similarly be shown to have no necessary imposition on the will of
its creator, God, but the demonstration above does not depend on this. The
demonstration about logic would be another discussion, which I sincerely hope
you could enjoy.  
  
Tom Cohoe  

@Talmid  
  
"Only if you believe that a form of Occasionalism is true, which is hardly a
christian view. Once you separate God action of keeping things existing from
the effects caused by creatures on other creatures there is a easy separation
between allowing creatures to do things and doing the things."  
  
Exactly, the idea that God is the only agent and the crated natures have no
proper activity is not a Christian one, the same as the idea that God is the
author of their deficiencies and weaknesses instead of their abilities and
strengths.  
  
  
"Miscarriages are truly bad, my man, i cant argue against that."  
  
  

@ Walter Van den Acker,  
  
Original sin was the fall of creation and suffering was the consequence of
this fall. We are all in this fallen creation. No one is being "punished", not
even Adam and Eve. They just inevitably chose sin given free will and time.
Human free will can also be modelled by an infinite unbiased random binary
sequence so all choices exist in it somewhere (as simple a model as you are
likely to find). Adam and Eve, in time, chose to leave temporal paradise and
enter the fallen creation. Knowledge of good and evil meant a return to
temporal paradise was gone without the intervention of God to bring them to
the new creation, the eternal (outside of time) paradise with God.  
  
This is where we are, all of us, people, babies, good people, bad people,
dogs, ticks, mosquitos, and viruses. There is only one creation (simplicity
again). We are all in it together. God did not cause multiple worlds for each
to choose, and by the choice define right and wrong (for you are the one
claiming to redefine things, not me). As a human with an infinite component to
your mind, since you are free, you can always choose your own way to stay
separate from God. In eternity (outside of time), when the new creation
replaces this one, choosing will no longer be possible, so if you have elected
to be separate from God, you will stay separate from God.  
  
The world we live in is not so by necessity. It could have been anything
(modelled by the random sequence). It could have been a world in which 1+ 1 is
3 and the rules of logic could have been anything. But the world we live in is
the way it is because of love. Love, not necessity. Love is why after
inevitably (given endless time) exiting temporal paradise, there is still
Salvation if you freely choose it. The innocent, even mosquitos (which are
actually rather beautiful) will have an appropriate room in God's eternal
mansion, where the leopard lies down with the kid and the suckling child plays
on the hole of the asp [Isaiah 11 KJV].  
  
Nobody has to follow your restrictions, which center on a small and dark
vision. Least of all you.  
  
Tom Cohoe  
  
PS - I have had a lot of driving and other extra things to prepare for my
son's acceptance ceremony at RCIA, so I have not had time to correct this for
error or good expression - TC  

I accidently posted my reply before it was finished but your "solution" for
the PoE (along with Ed's and Augustine's) comes down to "there is suffering in
the world because God wanted a world with suffering".  
The main point is whether we could call a being who wants a world of suffering
"good".  
I think it's obvious we can't, unless it is impossible to create a world
without suffering. But that is not so.  
I am sure Hitler could see his "solutions" as justified, but that doesn't make
them so.  
So, you have given interesting reasons, but you haven't given good ones,
unless you keep redefining "good", of course.

(The end!)  
  
It seems to me, Walter, that the proposition:  
  
\- the world that the christian tradition says that God created is more
atractive to God than one were no evil, natural or moral, ever happened thanks
to the more types of goods that exist on it  
  
Is defensible. It seems that your best strategy is to continue to attack the
idea that the Christian God can be said to be good in any meaningful sense.
But this seems to me not that great of a move, as seeing how God is not good
in the sense we are.

@Walter  
  
It’s your claim that God could just give everyone a choice to participate in
the Trinity that was the main reason for me claiming that you don’t
understand. Being in the direct presence of God is not a trivial thing. Even
prophets like Abram, Joshua, Ezekiel and Daniel collapsed when they cane into
God’s presence. They just couldn’t even stand. Peter, James and John collapsed
at the transfiguration. Paul collapsed on the road to Damascus. It is clearly
something inexpressibly overwhelming, such greatness that it inspires an awe
and fear that is well beyond normal human experience. That’s just being in His
presence. We’re talking about consciously participating in His being. This is
of course beyond our imagination, even those who have experienced something of
it cannot describe anything at all of it. So to assume that it’s just like you
asking lodgers to stay in your house is missing everything.  
  
With regards St Faustina’s comments being a “projection of her emotions”, why
is it that all the saints, all those who have experienced something of God see
it the same way?  
  
  
  

@Simon  
  
Good point there, we do accept suffering a lot. I just suppose that Walter
would reply, that on these cases we would have the goods while not suffering
anything, which is a acceptable view to the non-christian.  
  
@Walter  
  
I see what you are saying. Just a correction: on the view i'am defending God
is beyond what we usually mean by good, for He has no essence separate from
His essence that He must be a great exemplar of, but is THE good that we all
recept a fraction, you could say. It is not a case of the voluntaristic view
were God chooses things to be good for no reason so i dont see much
circularity. The name "good" that we use to Him mean only that He has no lack,
but it has little to do with our virtues.  
  
Now, could this Being, beyond our good but also its cause, choose something
that we would not choose? I would say that we just cant know much of this
answer a priori. Since God has no nature that we can separate from Him and say
"His nature is to choose such and such" them there is a sense were, while He
can by no means be evil*, He is sure hard to predict.  
  
Notice that the monotheistic-or-close pagans, that had no Bible, normally did
not really treat God as much similar to us. This because pure reason cant
really show much of how He thinks, only that He cant be bad(and what i
mentioned below). This world, revelation, the Incarnation, these are all
suprises that say a bit more of who He is but only say so much.  
  
  
*for being evil is to lack virtues, and God does not lack anything. One also could not expect Truth to lie or He to create us with our wills being draw to virtue(so commanding us to be good) and them command us to ignore virtue for no good reason, that would be contradictory and against Truth 

WCB  
  
"Just answer the question."  
  
I just did. You are playing games here. Reading the Bible verses I listed it
is obvious these were not metaphorical. If you play this game, then everyting
in the Bible is a metaphor no matter how obviously not metaphorical any verse
is. If you saddle up that donkey and ride it, you have to keep riding. Every
Bible verse then is a metaphor and means nothing objectively by your own
rhetorical nonsense.  
  
The you are now a post-modernist gibberish purveyer.  
  
WCB

_[They] do often take thought of their own safety and good name, and abstain
from finding fault with the wicked, because they fear their wiles and
violence. And although they do not fear them to such an extent as to be drawn
to the commission of like iniquities, nay, not by any threats or violence
soever; yet those very deeds which they refuse to share in the commission of
they often decline to find fault with, when possibly they might by finding
fault prevent their commission. They abstain from interference, because they
fear that, if it fail of good effect, their own safety or reputation may be
damaged or destroyed; not because they see that their preservation and good
name are needful, that they may be able to influence those who need their
instruction, but rather because they weakly relish the flattery and respect of
men, and fear the judgments of the people, and the pain or death of the body;
that is to say, their non-intervention is the result of selfishness, and not
of love_.

Walter  
  
“ Notice that the main goal is to avoid serious suffering, not to cherish it.”  
  
I think you’re confusing different types of suffering. Often people don’t
enjoy exercise, but they suffer it because the end result is good from the
perspective of physical health. However we generally make the choice there, we
understand how it helps our health. What about a young child forced not to
ride it’s tricycle on a busy road, or to take some bad tasting medicine. In
these cases most children don’t understand the end good. A few children may
trust their parents, and so for them (and there parents!) it’s not really a
problem. For others, the hurt and pain they feel at the unfairness of it all
often causes them far more problems than the bad taste or the limited cycling
options.  
  
“That's like the fire brigade. It is a good, but it is only relative. if there
were no possible fires, a fire brigade would not be a good. If God didn't
create a world of suffering for us, suffering (even mild suffering) would not
be a good.”  
  
Have you had any experience of very spoilt children? Children who get
everything they want, whenever they want it, can do no wrong, have people who
clear their mess up, no expectations etc. Of course this is always going to be
an over generalisation, and I’m not equating it directly with the process of
our spiritual creation, but do they generally have an empathetic view of
others? Or are they usually self absorbed and obnoxious?

Talmid  
  
Your action of drinking is your own thing _if_  
your action is not actively created and sustained by God.Without God's act
there would be no action on your part because .

Mr Geocon  
  
I am not sure what you are repying to, but Ed does not give any reason why
_truly good_ people are _punished_.

@Walter  
  
Your original comment probably got bugged, for i dont see you adressing
directly and the post on the cup stops suddently.  
  
That we cant see the comment after posting tends to generate this problem.

Please explain how coitus and miscarriages are "the work of God" and how it's
possible for man to prevent Almighty God from working.

Talmid  
  
It is impossible to "separate God's action of keeping things existing from the
effects caused by creatures on other creatures" because the effects caused by
creatures are part of the things that are actively created and "kept existing"
by God.

(Cont.)  
  
And notice that until now i'am only looking at this life. It seems to me that
the life that exists on this planet do have enough goodness that it could
exist.  
  
If we take humans possibility of theosis and heaven into account them the
individual suffering is also way less important that it looks if we look only
at this life.  
  
"What about Hell?"  
  
Well, a molinist would argue that God can't force everyone to go to heaven, so
accepting that some will deserve hell is part of the deal. The thomist, i
think, would probably argue that God could save everyone but does not do it
because of the goods that occour thanks to the bad existence. Both positions
could be truth, who knows which.  
  
And, since we are talking about non-sensible realms, it is christian dogma
that God DID create saints that did not need suffering: the angels. So yea,
already covered.  
  
"What about the demons?"  
  
Same as humans. Either they could not be necessarily made for loving Him or
they could but the demons have their own place in the game(as part of the
saints trials, as pushing history to certain directions etc).  

As I proposed in those earlier articles, bafflement at suffering is less the
_cause_ than the _consequence_ of the modern West’s apostasy from the Catholic
faith. It also reflects the softness and decadence of a dying civilization
that has become accustomed to affluence and cannot fathom a higher good beyond
ease and beyond this life, for the sake of which we might embrace suffering.
Nor is it apostates alone who exhibit this blindness. The spiritual rot has
eaten its way deep into the Church, afflicting even those who are otherwise
loyal to orthodoxy and Christian morality. And in our disinclination to accept
suffering, we are only ensuring ourselves more of it.

Walter,  
  
You claim that St. Augustine doesn't give an answer, but then you list all of
his answers.

Simon (and this holds for "Anonymous" too)  
  
It doesn't matter whether the fall is spiritual or not.  
Creating free rational beings does not imply some of them falling in terms of
pride. It only implies this if rational creatures are created with an
uncontollable sense of pride. But it does not follow that a rational creature
must be proud.  
Anyway, even if it's true that _some_ creatures "fall" in this way, that is
the problem of those creatures, and not my problem. The fall is a theodicy
that is supposed to show that due to the fact that _some_ fell, we _all_
suffer, including the "good" who do not have the sin of pride. They do not
have any "lesson" to learn.because they have already made the right choice to
align with the father.  
And that is why the Fall a very bad theodicy.  
  

Here too Augustine emphasizes that God allows the good to suffer alongside the
wicked in part to wean them from their attachment to this world, where their
reluctance to criticize the wicked is a symptom of this attachment:

Talmid  
  
"And what if such and such is true".  
The point is that "such and such" makes absolutely no sense.  
  
Mr Geocon  
  
They are answer to some question, but not to the question "Why do good people
get punished?"  
  
Tony  
  
The answer comes down to "nobody is actually good and therefore everybody
deserves punishment". The "relevant sense" is "the relevant sense of deserving
(or not deserving) punishment.  
The point is that if you are good in the sense that you do nothing wrong and
do not shrink from doing youir duty to condemn the wickedness that surrounds
them, you do not deserve punishment and if you still suffer, it is not
punishment.

“ Psalm 50:11: I know all the birds of the mountains; And the wild beasts of
the field are mine.”  
  
Where suffering of animals is as part of nature, we must trust that to God.
Life could not have evolved without suffering, and we must trust that the rich
tapestry of dark and light is perfectly rounded in the end. “All is well” as
He told Julian of Norwich. This is just faith in God’s goodness, and I have
confidence that the great suffering of animals in nature will make be a
necessary part of a perfect plan when we see things as they are.  
  
Where it’s caused by humans, we are responsible. We each are called to play
our part in reducing the suffering of others, as far as we are able. I can’t
judge a poor person who overworks a donkey to build a house, or buys factory
farmed meat, but those who can afford to support better welfare and always
choose the cheapest/cruelest must be at least partly responsible for the
cruelty.  
  
It’s similar with children. We can’t see God’s full plan, but we know that
life is short for all of us next to eternity. We can only play our part in
reducing it where we can, and trust the rest to God.  
  
As Augustine alludes to, some who have suffered the most can become the
purest, most loving people you could meet. Others become hard and cruel. God
is refining us like “silver in the furnace”. If we go with the process as he
asks us to, and most of the saints actually welcome suffering in themselves,
we have good reason to believe that it’s to our benefit in the long run. Most
difficult of course is when it’s others suffering, especially those we love.
But it’s exactly the same in that we can do what we can to help (including
righteous anger in the very rare cases where that is the right response), but
must do all we can to avoid becoming hard and cruel ourselves in response.
Difficult as it may be, we must trust. We must try to see that what is sharp
and apparently meaningless in the moment, is very different from the widest
perspective.  
  
Ultimately we are all called to follow the “suffering servant”, born to “Our
Lady of Sorrows”. Which is why the modern “I don’t believe in God because of
suffering” position misses everything.

Hi Ficino! All is well. Great to see you. I really miss the old days on the
classical theism forum. I'm thinking of starting another classical theism
community--just wondering if Ed would be okay with me shamelessly plugging it
in the com boxes here from time to time.

@jmchugh:  
  
"There is no way that you could argue that the actual existence of Satan is a
positive good."  
  
I would argue that the existence of Satan, qua *being* is a positive good,
because being is good -- this is Thomism 101. God did not create Satan as
Satan; Asking why permit or allow Satan qua Satan, is asking the wrong
question. Satan does not exist alone in a vacuum but as an element within the
created order. The created order is good (not even Satan wants to destroy it
to the point of non-existence which is what you are arguing entails, rather he
wants to pervert it to his *own* perverted ends); could there be some created
order that is better in some aspect or other, say, without Satan as Satan?
Maybe; and? At any rate, we have no way of ascertaining such things.  
  
"Now, as to us mortals you set-up a false dichotomy. You suggest that either
we accept the traditional notion of the fall and its consequences, or that we
accept the non-existence of man."  
  
This is not a false-dichotomy but the necessity of origins. And I did not said
non-existence of man, I said non-existence of jmchugh -- I am explicitly
making things personal to make you see that playing God with only limited
knowledge does not go well. If the fall had not happened, history would have
been different; we -- you and I -- would not be here, presumably different
people would be. But then there would have been no incarnation and no
resurrection, and no Most Blessed and Holy Virgin Mary. Some goods necessitate
some evils; as the Church and all the saints teach, God allows or permits some
evils, to bring about a bigger, better Good from them.  
  
"But there are more options than that. For we could accept for example
universal salvation, annihilationism, or reincarnation."  
  
These are "options" to what? Certainly not to the fall. There is no need of
salvation if there is no fall. Both anihilationism and reincarnation have
fatal philosophical and theological (speaking as a Catholic) problems. Option
to hell? My guess is that you are thinking of Hell in the wrong way, but why
guess when you can clarify things if you want to.

@Walter and anon. I’m deliberately using necessary in a way that will not be
popular here. I think a huge amount of time and credibility is wasted on
arguing whether God had choice in something. Pretty much all of those
arguments are meaningless. There are some realities God could have brought
forth that we can sort of imagine, say that there are two temporal dimensions
and four spatial dimensions. Really tricky to actually get your head around,
but we have at least some ability to do so. There are others where we just
incapable of even imagining. To argue about God’s choices is therefore
meaningless unless he revealed something about it.  
  
When I use necessary here, I mean it purely in that it seems necessary in
order to achieve God’s plan, which is at least in part to create children who
choose to be as like Him, and can therefore participate with Him in the
Trinity. That is an astounding thing, a top down view of the telos of the
universe.  
  
Arguing what is necessary from a bottom up perspective in the way that
philosophers tend to, in terms of what God could and could not do, is like
ants on a cathedral wall arguing about the cathedral’s architecture and
construction. Yes they are builders themselves and so know something of
building, but it’s several orders of magnitude higher in it’s nature than ants
are capable of conceiving. So if Brunelleschi was able to hear the ants
debate, he would perhaps smile, but he would not bother trying to reveal the
answers to their ponderings as it would just not make sense to them. He would
have to wait until their understanding was no longer constrained by their
antness.

Of course Christian doctrine does not lead us to expect little or no
suffering, but that is a strong argument against Christian doctrine .  
The problem of evil (or suffering) does not say that there should not be so
much evil or suffering if _Christian doctrine_ is true, it says that the
existence of (so much) evil or suffering is incompatible with a tri-omni God
and _hence_ Christian doctrine, along with other doctrines about God, is
false. IOW Christian doctrine _cannot_ be true.  
It is hardly a secret that "the Fall" is one giant theodicy right from the
start. But it's a bad theodicy for several reasons, the most important one
being that a tri-omni God would not allow for any fall. Without the Fall human
beings would have experienced the beatific vision without the need of
suffering.  
  
Moreover, this article does not explain why the good are punished and neither
does Augustine, it actually comes down to "nobody is good" or "the good are
not really punished.".  
People who "shrink from doing their duty to condemn the wickedness that
surrounds them" are not good, so they do not present a case af good people
being punished.  
  
And if "the loss of worldly blessings – material goods, reputation,
friendships, health, livelihood, even life itself – is permitted by God so
that we might learn not to cling to these things at the expense of the
beatific vision, the value of which trumps all else", that may explain why
good people suffer but it isn't a punishment.  
  

WCB  
  
Anonymous  
"How do you know this prophecy isn't speaking metaphorically?"  
  
Yes, when the Bible claims X, metaphorically it means Not X.  
  
WCB

It is true that Prof. Feser's post addresses the evils suffered _given the
Fall and sin_ in the world. And so it does not address the issue of evil
_absent_ the supposition of the Fall and sin.  
  
_Moreover, this article does not explain why the good are punished ... it
actually comes down to "nobody is good"_  
  
The article points out that everybody is "not good" _in the relevant sense_
needed for a question of "why are the good punished". This is an answer to the
question by correcting the presumption embedded in the question.

_Although they be far from the excesses of wicked, immoral, and ungodly men,
yet they do not judge themselves so clean removed from all faults as to be too
good to suffer for these even temporal ills. For every man, however laudably
he lives, yet yields in some points to the lust of the flesh. Though he do not
fall into gross enormity of wickedness, and abandoned viciousness, and
abominable profanity, yet he slips into some sins, either rarely or so much
the more frequently as the sins seem of less account_.

@ Walter Van den Acker,  
  
"It always baffles me [...]"  
  
It baffles you only because you are determined to be baffled. One in a frenzy
to show that God must fall under the rules he insists must hold sway is not
likely to be anything but baffled by truth.  
  
"[...] that God can do absurd things like making thing from nothing [...]"  
  
Your proclamation that God cannot do a thing because you call it absurd is so
arrogant that it is almost not worth responding to, but it must be pointed out
for the benefit of others that truth does not require your permission to be
and your refusal to countenance this does not affect this fact.  
  
Even an infinite random sequence of 1's and 0's, a strictly limited image of
God, is above your understanding and it can show how wrong is your insistence
of the way things must be.  
  
You actually know this but fight to rule anyway. You are especially in need of
God's grace and mercy.  
  
Tom Cohoe  

WCB, serious question here: if you think your argument works, are Catholics
dogmatically required to believe that the author of Psalm 23 is not a human,
but in fact is a sheep?

But there is also the attitude that the good man takes toward those who do
live especially wicked lives. There are many who disapprove of such wickedness
and would never practice it themselves, but who nevertheless, out of
cowardice, refrain from criticizing it in others. Here Augustine makes some
remarks that are especially relevant to our times, and worth quoting at
length:

Hey Walter!  
  
"The problem of evil (or suffering) does not say that there should not be so
much evil or suffering if Christian doctrine is true, it says that the
existence of (so much) evil or suffering is incompatible with a tri-omni God
and hence Christian doctrine, along with other doctrines about God, is false."  
  
And does not the role that christian doctrine puts suffering into at least
make the argument lose force?  
  
Atheist: "there is no way that a perfect deity and the evil on this world
could coesist".  
  
Christian: "And what if such and such is true?"  
  
I mean, it just amazes me how at least my suffering seems justified on this
worldview*, i consider it a philosophical and existential advantage that
christianity has against generic theism and judaism and islam.  
  
At least the logical problem of evil seems weaker by the sheer existence of
this faith.  
  
*the only worldviews than seem as good as combating it are the ones with reencarnarion or atheistic ones(not that it is justified on most atheistic views, but on these you do not expect a answer anyway)

@ Walter Van den Acker,  
  
"If you say that the proposition "God exists" is a necessary truth you are
applying a procedure that by your own admission you cannot apply.  
So, that makes every attempt to use logic to argue for God completely futile."  
  
I have not "admitted" anything.  
  
An infinite random sequence such as I have described is just a limited model
of simplicity that is also, in some sense, about something that is not known
or accessible, or understood by someone. Applied to my free will, it would not
mean that my free will choices are not ordered to anything. It means, assuming
its validity, that whatever process I use to arrive at a decision is beyond
your ability to know, understand, or predict, using whatever measurement or
calculation you care to try.  
  
I don't use logic to argue for the existence of God, at least not logic alone.
I use observation. I open my eyes and see what God has made as in Romans 1:20.
The logic part starts with an assumption: "There must be a simple unifying
cause of all of creation". What we know as "science" cannot fill the role of
logic in the argument. Science is not remotely simple, but is highly complex.
The simpler explanation, we call God. It is, in fact, a definition.  
  
"If, given a finite amount of time, I will arrive at a point when death ends
the process, then it is simply a matter of random chance."  
  
No, my free will choice is random to you, not to me. You cannot understand how
I choose or predict what I will choose, but that does not make my choice
disordered. It just means that you cannot understand or predict it. You do not
just "happen" to be a theist or an atheist when you die. Your intellectual
part, private as described (the reason for modelling it as random), directs
your free will (it can still deliberately choose wrongly), but such a
deliberate wrong choice turns you from God, where you will stay if you die in
refusal. Your knowledge of the love of God plays a role in the choice, but you
freely make it.  
  
"it seems that God has waited just long enough for the first time Adam did
something wrong to condemn him"  
  
God did not condemn Adam or anyone else.  
  
"since he was the one who put the sequence there in the first place, He knew
exactly what was going to happen and when it was going to happen"  
  
The sequence is just a model of unpredictable simplicity. It is not an
ordering of creation.  
  
"Adam, just like the rest of us, was always doomed and has always been in need
of redemption. There was no fall, Human beings were created fallen right from
the start."  
  
Adam was not always doomed, in fact, is not doomed.  
  
Tom Cohoe  

WCB  
  
"The Lord is my sheperd" is obviously metaphorical. Genesis 1:30 is not. Nor
is Isaiah. 11 or 65.  
  
WCB

Walter  
  
This awe and fear of being in God’s presence is not something he inspires,
it’s His infinite greatness perceived by a finite creature. It’s the shock of
reality unveiled. From behind the veil, at times He spills over such that we
can experience a diluted form of His presence where words like gentle, tender,
love, peace etc are used. For now we only see dimly, our perception is
naturally tuned to dim reality, and so it’s in this diluted form that most of
us can distinguish anything other than infinite ‘brightness’.  
  
In general you take a position that conflicts with everything revealed in
scripture. So where do you get your information on what God is, what God could
do and couldn’t do? If it’s just reason, then what makes you think you can
understand the timeless and the infinite? We can’t even think without time. If
you ignore revelation, what makes you think humans are able to understand such
things any more than ants can understand Special Relativity?  
  
When Jesus Bar Joseph was convicted, Pilate gave the people the option to
choose between him and Jesus Barabbas (“son of the father”). Two messianic
figures representing two different human perspectives, one human, one divine.
Peter originally saw Jesus as the human version, and Jesus responded with “Get
thee behind me Satan”.  
  
This is made clearer by the three temptations that Jesus was given in the
desert. Satan did not ask for worship, as he is more sly than that. He
presented different versions of this human perspective, which relate to
suffering, power, and image (being liked or admired). Satan even quotes
scripture, the master theologian using scripture to sell the human
perspective.  
  
This is what spiritual discernment is all about. You can use Ignatian
exercises to help with this, you can go on silent retreat (even into the
desert). You can go to weekly mass and a weekly holy hour in silence. Where
you almost certainly won’t ‘get’ why your reasoning doesn’t resonate with
people who trust God is in theology or philosophy books, or internet forums
(interesting as they may be).

There is no obligation to give correction if you have a confidence it won't be
heeded. That likelihood of no good being accomplished may make it prudent to
not give the correction, especially in the face of tremendous harm caused by
losing your job.  
  
But I think it would be worth keeping an eye towards how could you situate
things so that the correction would be better received (establish goodwill and
trust in the relationship and being thoughtful about how you go about with the
correction) and/or make the harms more manageable (diversify your income)
and/or less likely to occur (be irreplaceable at your job).

@Walter  
  
"The main point is whether we could call a being who wants a world of
suffering "good."  
  
Well, we can't. I do call Him Goodness Itself and other cool names, though.  
  
A essencial part of this christian theodicy* is that God has a relation with
morality totally diferent than our own, see for instance the fact that He can
judge people, can kill people, can pester people until they want to do His
thing(see Jonah) etc. The Book of Job lets this clear when God finally
appears, for Job is trying to tread God as a equal the whole time, who needs
to explain His actions to him and all that, and when He finally appears He
makes very clear that Job treatment of Him as how we would do a normal person
is completely ridiculous.  
  
So the idea that God is good yes but on a more analogical than univocal way is
not a clever apologetical invention but is there on the religions of the book
since the beginning. It just sounds bizarre to me to see someone argue
otherwise, specially when the "the names Scripture uses to talk of God should
not be understood as exactly what they mean in us" is a thing since the church
fathers.  
  
This is important, for if God goodness is not exactly our own them His
priorities can be diferent. And, well, on the christian worldview the struggle
a believer has to be become holy, the life and struggles of the animals etc
are goods that let the universe better.  
  
Notice that even we can see value in something that requires suffering. For
instance, would you rather we, suppose we could, put all savage animals in
zoos and other controlated environments and make the ecosistems that exist now
stay functioning artificially or you would want to also let places were there
are animals living like they do and only interfere to not let extinctions and
things like that happen?  
  
*if this is the right name

There is so much good in the worst of us, and so much bad in the best of us,
that it ill behooves any of us to find fault with the rest of us (J. T. Adams)  
  
A neat division of mankind into THE GOOD and THE WICKED is probably a bit too
simple and also quite dangerous.

@grodrigues Thank you for your reply.  
  
I think there is room to expand the conversation. It's a big, multi-faceted
topic.  
  
Would you indulge me some more questions? I don't expect you to have every
answer or even any. This is a chance for thought. Whatever happens is fine by
me.  
  
Also, I'm not trying to defeat you in a debate. I'm trying to grasp a dogma
that at first blush is incomprehensible to me.  
  
Firstly, do you think questioning this dogma is understandable? Can you see
why at first blush it appears strange and contradictory?  
  
Let's say you were a pagan with no particular views on this matter. A number
of philosophers and theologians tried to sell you on various dogmas relating
to the creation of man. These stories would range from pagan to Hindu to
Buddhist, to naturalistic, and most certainly Christian. You are trying to
choose among these stories. From a purely intellectual perspective do you
think the Christian story would be the one you intellectually would most
assent to?  
  
(Again I'm speaking purely intellectually. I'm not talking about you assenting
based due to divine inspiration.)

I am with Anonymous. I come here to read Dr. Feser's writings, not to read Dr.
Feser's writings.

Dr. Feser, you have nothing to regret with respect to the way you handle your
blog. Please do continue to share news about your excellent books here, as
well as other extremely edifying posts. I, like many others, learn a great
deal from you. Just keep up the fantastic work, and pay no heed to this sort
of off-the-mark criticism.

Well, you push it over and over. And it's a hit piece and not llike your
excellent philsophical books.

Recently I was interviewed by Steve and Becky Greene on _The Catholic
Conversation_ about my book _[All One in Christ: A Catholic Critique of Racism
and Critical Race
Theory](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1621645800/ref=dbs_a_def_rwt_bibl_vppi_i8)_.
You can [listen to the interview
here](https://thecatholicconversation.libsyn.com/edward-feser-on-critical-
race-theory). Author Gavin Ashenden and teacher Katherine Bennett [discuss the
book](https://open.spotify.com/episode/6X4B5CqRJ2ok0LBwtZ9JD9?si=BvkBLwLmRvKfAXkvsLG7Pg&nd=1)
at the _Catholic Herald_ ’s _Merely Catholic_ podcast, judging it “an absolute
must-read for all Catholic educators.” Meanwhile, at the _Acton Institute
Powerblog_ , Sarah Negri [kindly
reviews](https://blog.acton.org/archives/124031-the-catholic-church-vs-
critical-race-theory.html) the book. From the review:

Other reviews of and interviews about _All One in Christ_ can be found
[here](http://edwardfeser.blogspot.com/2022/09/talking-about-all-one-in-
christ.html), [here](http://edwardfeser.blogspot.com/2022/10/the-latest-on-
all-one-in-christ.html), and
[here](http://edwardfeser.blogspot.com/2022/11/all-one-in-christ-at-
beliefnet.html).

_This book is perfectly subtitled in that it spends significant time
evaluating both the church’s denunciation of racism and the incompatibility of
Church teaching with CRT… Readers who seek a thorough overview of the church’s
statements and position on racism will find it here, and Christians who have
ever experienced confusion as to whether CRT obtains as a remedy for it will
come away with the understanding that Christianity and critical race theory
rest on entirely different first principles; indeed, they present
irreconcilable worldviews_ …

"CRT is here to stay."  
  
Bogus nonsense is not going away soon, although what it is called. and what
nonsense it proclaims, and what wrong it promotes on behalf of whom will shift
with regularity until the end.  
  
Tom Cohoe

I was thinking the exact same thing. This blog is nothing but Feser, Feser,
Feser.

_Despite the subtitle’s giveaway that Feser will ultimately reject CRT as
contrary to church teaching, his exposé of its tenets is impressive. Drawing
mainly from Ibram X. Kendi’s and Robin DiAngelo’s bestselling popularizations
of the theory, he takes time to lay out the claims of CRT’s popular proponents
with precision and a fair amount of objectivity_…

_Perhaps the most satisfying chapter in this book is when Feser bombards that
worldview with the artillery of logical principles. He proceeds down a long
line of logical fallacies committed by popular critical race theorists_…

No, it's a puff piece. Here are the facts:  
  
https://www.catholicworldreport.com/2022/08/22/countering-disinformation-
about-critical-race-theory/

I love that Anon* can easily pass from "actually, the truth is this" to "we
will win anyway!" so easily.  
  
The truth is not the goal, right?  
  
*assuming it is the same guy

I read that link. We can trade links all night and settle nothing. CRT is here
to stay. Happy Thanksgiving.

Nonsense. All I have done is posted reviews and interviews about the book as
they have appeared, and I have done exactly the same thing with every other
book I have written. The fact that you are annoyed by this in the case of this
particular book alone is evidence that the lack of objectivity re: CRT lies in
you, not me. Nor is the book a "hit piece." I characterize the view fairly,
with extensive quotes from original sources, and provide a battery of
arguments against it. And the book is written in a non-vituperative style. The
only "hit piece" is your gratuitous and undefended accusation.

In response, I’d point out that these remarks are a bit misleading insofar as
I do in fact also quote from and discuss the work of academic critical race
theorists like Derrick Bell, Kimberlé Crenshaw, Alan Freeman, Richard Delgado
and Jean Stefancic. But it is true that there is a special focus on
popularizers like Kendi and DiAngelo, and for precisely the reason Negri says.
I defended this approach [in a recent
article](https://www.catholicworldreport.com/2022/08/22/countering-
disinformation-about-critical-race-theory/).

_The book also makes a social scientific case in support of alternative
theories to CRT that align better with church teaching. Feser provides
evidence from economics, history, sociology, and psychology to counter CRT
proponents’ unempirical claims and offers other explanations (such as cultural
factors) for the supposed racial discrimination at the root of socioeconomic
disparities_…

@Infinite_Growth  
  
I saw CRT open for Marxist Critique at the Hollywood bowl.

The responses you have gotten to this book sure have been fun to listen to
(for certain definitions of "fun" anyway).  
  
When it is repeatedly asserted that all your objections to CRT aren't
objections to "real" CRT and we cannot look at any of the popular conceptions
to draw conclusions about it, one can't help but see the similarities in these
arguments with those claiming that "real socialism has never been tried!"

_One rather wonders whether Feser, out of the principle of charity, which he
accuses CRT proponents of violating, ought to have engaged the academicians
who promote CRT rather than its popularizers, since he demolishes the
assertions of the latter so effectively. It would have felt more like a fair
fight.  But in choosing to dismantle the popular arguments of CRT, he does
send in his troops where the attack is thickest, since most people’s
understanding of CRT comes from its more popular version_.

_Other highlights of_ All One in Christ _include a refreshing discussion of
nationalism, patriotism, immigration, and integration, all of which pertain to
any serious analysis of race and ethnicity…_

The hipster objection. "Ugh, you're on _mainstream_ CRT? You should have
gotten it on vinyl."

_Feser is overwhelmingly convincing in his contention that, while racism is a
grave evil and remains a painful reality in our own day, a faithful Christian
(or any reasonable person who cares about human flourishing) should not
espouse critical race theory as a viable solution_.

I would agree with John above that Kant wasn't motivated by a desire to
undermine (Christian) theology, though he didn't help either.  
  
Hume has launched an attack on metaphysics, in particular, moral philosophy
and theology. I suspect Kant’s response to Hume was an act of self-defence, or
to borrow his own word in the _Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics_ , a
“rescue” mission. In a rescue mission, one is forced to rescue what he cares
about the most, and forgo the rest. Kant made a vigorous attempt to defend
moral philosophy, but left theology to fend for itself, if not threw it under
the bus.

_Reason… is impelled… to seek a resting-place in the regress from the
conditioned, which is given, to the unconditioned… This is the course which
our human reason, by its very nature, leads all of us, even the least
reflective, to adopt_ …

Reason, Kant says, cannot be satisfied as long as the explanations it posits
make reference only to what is conditioned, to contingent things. _Ultimate_
explanation must posit the existence of something which is absolutely _un_
conditioned or _necessary_. This something would be a single, unified “ _ens
realissimum_ ” or most real being, would be devoid of any defect, and would be
the source of all other reality – it would possess “the _highest_ causality…
which contains primordially in itself the sufficient ground of every possible
effect” (p. 499). Naturally, it is not the likes of Zeus or Odin that Kant has
in mind, but rather the Unmoved Mover of Aristotle and Aquinas, the One of
Plotinus, the Necessary Being of Leibniz, and so on.

I heard once that there were some translations of some buddhist texts in
Europe at his time. Funny to think how Hume reaction to they would be.

Also Gilson's Thomist Realism and The Critique of Knowledge and also
Methodical Realism. The second one is good for beginners.

@WCB  
  
Googled it and it seems that Proclus book is called "On the Existence of
Evils". It is quite a good "theodicy" on a neoplatonical theism. Read it
eventually, it is small but quite cool.  
  
Neoplatonism is very diferent than christian theism, but both do overlap a bit
on some aspect of theodicy. And the neoplatonics do escape of some problems
than the christians have on this theme. If you are interested on theism but
the problem of evil is a great preocupation them give Proclus a chance.  
  

Also the header of your last section fooled me. "The afterlife of Hume and
Kant". Your previous section talked about how Kant believed moral values
needed the next life, so I was expecting a discussion of how Kant's view of
the afterlife was different from Hume's annihilationism.

The trouble with this sort of reasoning, Kant thinks, is not that its
conclusion is false – again, he was no atheist – but rather that, given his
epistemology, reason lacks the resources to transcend the empirical world and
prove the existence of a necessary or unconditioned being outside it. The
notion of causality, he argues, applies only _within_ the phenomenal world,
the world of things as they appear to us, whereas reasoning to a necessary
being would require applying it beyond that world, to the noumenal world or
things as they are in themselves. And we cannot, in his view, know the latter.

Oh boy, that Plato book sure is odd. I still need to read it again, maybe i
get it them!  
  
And while Parmenides probably did not had a way of accounting for evil, or any
other event, neoplatonists did have their ways. The Proclus book i mentioned
is very interesting, probably would interest you.

Contemporary atheism is founded on Hume's empirical atheism and Kant's
conceptual agnosticism. That's why so many of them on YouTube and Facebook
call themselves agnostic atheists: because atheism as it is recognized today
is a marriage of the two.

WCB  
  
"I have never had the least sympathy with the a priori reasons against
orthodoxy, and I have by nature and disposition the greatest possible
antipathy to all the atheistic and infidel school. Nevertheless I know that I
am, in spite of myself, exactly what the Christian would call, and, so far as
I can see, is justified in calling, atheist and infidel."  
Thomas Huxley - Letter to Charles Kingsley (6 May 1863)  
  
Huxley most famously invented the term agnostic. If an agnostic can see no
reason to believe in God, then one can indeed also be an atheist. At bottom,
the burden of proof lies with the theist.  
  
WCB

WCB  
  
What evidence is there, hard evidence, we have a soul that survives evidence
and that there is a heaven. Other than ancient opinions? Why is life after
death and heaven and hell not mentioned at all in the Pentateuch?  
  
And yes, a truly good workman ala Plato would not make mistakes that need
rectifying.  
  
Why not start with creating all sentient beings good and in eternal bliss in
heaven to begin with? And then back to theological fatalism which i laid out
in an earlier thread? I never got a decent answer there.  
  
WCB  
  
WCB

That Hume could be so confident that he would cease to be is quite funny with
his view on casuality XD

There are Kantian atheists. A Kantian atheist could accept his general
metaphysical system while discarding his views on natural theology just like
he could accept Kant's position on mathematics while judging him to have erred
with regards to holding Euclidean geometry as logically necessary.

Would you say Kant was a univocist? It seems that by saying reason cannot get
to the ultimate foundation of reality because it cannot access things as they
are in themselves, he is suggesting that there is no appropriate analogical
predication of being.

_Now… that which is in no respect defective, that which is in every way
sufficient as a condition, seems to be precisely the being to which absolute
necessity can fittingly be described. For while it contains the conditions of
all that is possible, it itself does not require and indeed does not allow of
any condition, and therefore satisfies… the concept of unconditioned
necessity_…

Splendid! Finally an actual argument.  
  
Let’s recap: your initial claim is that the logical problem of evil provides
good philosophical reasons not to believe in the God of classical theism
because it shows there is no way to reconcile the bad things that happen to
people with “Omni” attributes we want to affirm about God.  
  
A response to this claim was then given that one possible “out” that can
preserve these divine attributes by hypothesizing that God could make
restitution to the wronged parties in the next life.  
  
You then made a bunch of irrelevant remarks about how everyone who disagrees
with you on this topic is stupid, and most people probably gave up on the
conversation. But now we actually have a non-trivial and non-circular
response! An immortal soul cannot exist that survives after death because we
don’t know how a soul interacts with the brain, so it is therefore impossible
for God to offer restitution to a person after death.  
  
Now that we have that all our of the way, ready for the philosophy? You sure?
Ok here it is:  
  
I reject your premise. An unsolved question is not a demonstration that two
concepts are incompatible.  
  
This is further justified by the arguments that Dr. Feser has made here (and
others have made elsewhere) that the mind cannot be wholly materially
determinate, and that there must be an immaterial component to our thoughts
(which is positive evidence for the soul).  
  
I conclude that the above theodicy has not been rebutted, and therefore the
problem of evil fails to demonstrate what you want to claim.

@Infinite Growth  
  
What do "stripped of all its properties" means? Even if you take away all of a
being visible characteristics there would still be the potentials, the thing
being a composite of essence and existence, the thing having started to be
etc, so perhaps 2 is false.  
  
Besides, I'am against conceivability arguments in general. Aunt May sure can
conceive of a Spiderman that is not Peter Parker, this is what she does, but
he is still the Spider. But this is the less important point, for the argument
is not the normal conceivability argument.  
  
On top of that, our cognition starts by a thing characteristics, we only know
the substance latter, and we classify things according to the characteristics
it has, so it is should not suprise us that we cant conceive of it with no
characteristics.  
  
I mean, a human is a rational animal, the essence is separated by its
characteristics. The diference between one essence and another is the
essencial characteristics any has, so it is no wonder that we cant
diferentiate one from another once we take the essencial characteristics away.  
  
So perhaps 1 is false, for it is probably the case that even on a substance
view of the self we should expect 2 to be true. Maybe only on Scotus-like view
were every thing has a natural "haecceitas"(had to google) 2 would be false.  
  
Sorry for not giving a straight answer, it is that my thinking got a to were
it wanted to go, it happens with me :)

WCB  
  
@Talmid  
"We can make sense of such a correlation only if we postulate a supreme being
who brings the two orders into correlation (in the afterlife)".  
  
See Plato, "The Laws - Book X". Here Plato tries to find arguments to convince
atheists to believe in God. Plato's Good Workman argument. God is a good
workman and so if good people suffer unfairly in this life, God will fix that
in the afterlife. Plato pretty much invented natural theology aimed squarely
at atheists. The trouble with his good workman hypothesis is it proves
nothing. It is based solely on hope. Maybe there is no God, no afterlife. And
a truly good workman does not allow errors now, that have to be rectified
later. So the Problem Of Evil rears its ugly head.  
  
WCB

Why do I propose that Kant’s influence did even more to bolster modern atheism
than Hume’s? Because Kant offered a _positive_ alternative to the traditional
metaphysics that upheld theism, whereas Hume’s critique is essentially
negative. To be sure, contemporary commentators are correct to hold that it is
too simple to read Hume as a mere skeptic, full stop. True, he does try to
undermine traditional metaphysical views about substance, causation, the self,
moral value, etc. But he also emphasizes that the hold such notions have over
common sense cannot be shaken by philosophical skepticism, since they are too
deeply rooted in human psychology. And for purposes of “common life,” they are
indispensable. Hume’s aim is merely to clip the wings of highfalutin
rationalist metaphysical speculation, not to undermine the convictions of the
ordinary person.

If Hume lived a little longer, he would have started to believe in some kind
of rebirth. Bundle theories of self naturally lead to belief in rebirth.

  
Immanuel Kant was, of course, not an atheist. So why devote an entry to him in
this series, thereby lumping him in with the likes of
[Nietzsche](https://edwardfeser.blogspot.com/2016/06/adventures-in-old-
atheism-part-i.html),
[Sartre](https://edwardfeser.blogspot.com/2016/08/adventures-in-old-atheism-
part-ii-sartre.html),
[Freud](https://edwardfeser.blogspot.com/2019/02/adventures-in-old-atheism-
part-iii-freud.html),
[Marx](https://edwardfeser.blogspot.com/2020/01/adventures-in-old-atheism-
part-iv-marx.html), [Woody
Allen](https://edwardfeser.blogspot.com/2021/08/adventures-in-old-atheism-
part-v-woody.html), and
[Schopenhauer](https://edwardfeser.blogspot.com/2021/10/adventures-in-old-
atheism-part-vi.html)? In part because Kant’s philosophy, I would suggest,
inadvertently did more to bolster atheism than any other modern system, Hume’s
included. He was, as Nietzsche put it, a “catastrophic spider” (albeit not for
the reasons Nietzsche supposed). But also in part because, like the other
thinkers in this series, Kant had a more subtle and interesting attitude about
religion than contemporary critics of traditional theology like the New
Atheists do.

@Talmid What do you think about this argument in favor of the bundle theory of
self?  
  
1\. If there is more to an object than its properties, then it is possible to
conceive of said object with all its properties stripped away.  
  
2\. That is inconceivable.  
  
3\. Therefore an object and its properties are one and the same.  
  
Christians aren't allowed to believe in bundle theories of self, because we
believe that G-d made us as perfect substances. That's why the church so
strongly opposes this transgender madness.

Moreover, as I have argued, if you do accept these background views, then to
be consistent you’d have to draw other conclusions that most New Atheist types
would not want to draw. Again, if you accept a Humean critique of natural
theology, then to be consistent you should also be skeptical about the claims
of natural science and ethics to tell us anything about objective reality. And
if you accept a Kantian critique of natural theology, then while you can
consistently take natural science and ethics to have a rational basis, you
cannot consistently treat theology with the contempt that Dawkins and Co.
typically do. Hence the lessons so many have drawn from Hume’s and Kant’s
critiques is not the one either of those critiques actually supports.

All the same, Kant’s critique of natural theology did not stem from the view
that it is an irrational enterprise.  Quite the contrary. The New Atheist
supposes that all theology reflects an insufficient respect for reason. Kant
argues, by contrast, that in fact natural theology reflects an _excessive
confidence_ in the power of reason. In particular, it reflects the conviction
that ultimate explanation is possible, that the world can be made intelligible
through and through. Nor did Kant suppose that natural theology looked for
such explanation in the crudely anthropomorphic “sky daddy” of New Atheist
caricature. Here is how he describes the basic impulse behind philosophical
theism in the _Critique of Pure Reason_ :

Again, in Kant’s view, it is not the abandonment of reason, but rather the
attempt to fulfill reason’s ultimate ambitions, that yields natural theology.
And reason will remain frustrated even in the face of Kantian attempts to show
that this ambition cannot be fulfilled. It is “quite beyond our utmost efforts
to _satisfy_ our understanding in this matter” but “equally unavailing are all
attempts to induce it to acquiesce in its incapacity” (p. 513).

Dr. Feser,  
  
How do you think Kant's nominalism played into his abandonment of metaphysical
proofs for God's existence? Michael Oberst recently wrote an article in
History of Phil Quarterly (2015) where he notes that while Kant says little
explicitly about universals, his recent interpreters agree that he "rejected
universals." Oberst agrees with some nuance (trying to situate Kant in some
middle ground between nominalism and realism).  
  
Without getting into exegesis of Kant on this point, do you think nominalism
might account for his denial of metaphysical proofs? It seems to me that his
nominalism would account for this and for his epistemology as well (with
nominalism understood as the denial of universal, extra mental form). Any
thoughts?  
  

WCB, this is a philosophy blog. We do philosophy here. If logical
demonstrations don’t qualify as “hard evidence” for you, you can go back to
Matt Dillihunty et al.  
  
The problem of evil (or at least the logical version of the problem of evil
that you keep harping on about), is a philosophical demonstration that the
existence of evil is inconsistent with God’s attributes of goodness,
omnipotence, etc. If Plato’s good work an argument provides a potential “out”
then the argument in the problem of evil fails because the conclusion does not
follow from the premises.  
  
Notice how in the thousands of words that Dr. Feser has devoted to the topic
of existential inertia, he has never once asked “where is the hard evidence
for existential inertia?” Because it doesn’t matter if you have independent
reasons to think such a thing exists. If the mere possibility of it’s
existence is consistent with the metaphysical premises of the classical
theists, then (most) cosmological arguments fail.  
  
You’re allowed to think that such theodicies are super unsatisfying
explanations, but stop pretending that “theists btfo with FACTS and LOGIC!!”
Nobody is going to take you seriously when you overstate your case like that.

Hun. It seems that this alternative view would not be capable of getting us to
objective morality, there is no self, so it would not serve as a alternative
to Kant theistic account.  
  
No wonder that Schopenhauer ethics seems more focused on describing that
prescribing.

Your post reminded me of Heinrich Heine's comments on Kant's life/philosophy.
The quote is from Heine's book "Religion and Philosophy in Germany: A
Fragment". It's on pages 108-109 on this online version.
https://archive.org/details/religionandphilo00heinuoft/page/108/mode/2up  
  
“The history of Immanuel Kant's life is difficult to portray, for he had
neither life nor history. He led a mechanical, regular, almost abstract
bachelor existence in a little retired street of Königsberg, an old town on
the north-eastern frontier of Germany. I do not believe that the great clock
of the cathedral performed in a more passionless and methodical manner its
daily routine than did its townsman, Immanuel Kant. Rising in the morning,
coffee-drinking, writing, reading lectures, dining, walking, everything had
its appointed time, and the neighbors knew that it was exactly half-past three
o'clock when Kant stepped forth from his house in his grey, tight-fitting
coat, with his Spanish cane in his hand, and betook himself to the little
linden avenue called after him to this day the "Philosopher's Walk." Summer
and winter he walked up and down it eight times, and when the weather was dull
or heavy clouds prognosticated rain, the townspeople beheld his servant, the
old Lampe, trudging anxiously behind Kant with a big umbrella under his arm,
like an image of Providence.  
  
What a strange contrast did this man's outward life present to his
destructive, world-annihilating thoughts! In sooth, had the citizens of
Königsberg had the least presentiment of the full significance of his ideas,
they would have felt far more awful dread at the presence of this man than at
the sight of an executioner, who can but kill the body. But the worthy folk
saw in him nothing more than a Professor of Philosophy, and as he passed at
his customary hour, they greeted him in a friendly manner and set their
watches by him.”  
(End quote)

That "God is simple" isn't from Parmenides. Correcting his error with truth
doesn't mean truth is from his error.  
  
Tom Cohoe  

@WCB  
  
Its been a while since i read The Laws, but in there Plato argues for:  
  
\- the existence of gods, with his cosmological argument that leads to the
existence of souls  
\- self movers - that started all other movement.  
  
\- That the gods care about us, by pointing out that a better caretaker cares
about the details of his works, so the gods do care about everything.  
  
If these arguments come before Book X, i dont remember, them the Good Workman
Argument does sound reasonable to one who accept these premises. Like Kant
moral argument, hard to dismiss if you agree with the initial premises, it is
just that atheists do not.  
  
About the problem of evil, i dont remember Plato adressing it at all*, but he
believed that:  
  
\- the soul is living in a innatural condition when stuck in the body  
  
\- that the soul is only happy when it goes to the intellectual goods, which
every soul has the potential to do.  
  
\- that after death the soul just goes eventually to another body  
  
It seems that these premises do help developing a response to the problem of
evil. Proclus,probably the best neoplatonist, did make a interesting little
book on it, worth a reading.  
  
*makes sense that the hebrews would know it(see the Torah and Job) before him, the gods that the atheists/agnostics of his time were discussing were the greek ones, so it would not come from they, and Plato was not only a elitist but also probably a ascetic, hardly the guy to care about lower people not having material goods

@WCB  
  
"Consider this, Hiram. The village atheist has an IQ of 150. Danny the village
idiot has an IQ of 50. How does concept of soul account for this? Is it
Danny's soul that is intellectually deficient? Or does his deficient brain
throttle his soul's itellect? How about Hiram? Is his soul's real IQ 200?
Could it be we are all deficient as to our brains and withou that, we would
all have IQs of 200?"  
  
It will depend on the school, but most dualists i can think of can account for
this.  
  
Take for instance the more platonic/dharmic/spiritist view that the soul is a
substance whose nature is other than the body and that not only has no
necessary conection with it but is actually weakened by being stuck with it.
This is pretty straightfoward here: the soul is stuck with the body
limitations and so its natural capacities will be worser on a crappier body.  
  
Take now the cartesian view were the soul is a substance whose nature is other
than the body but is made to function with the body. Here the sould and the
body must function together to it to work well, so a bad body will make the
soul less capable of functioning.  
  
Now take the thomistic view were the soul is the form of the body. Here things
also work well, for the body is responsable for sense data, memory and
imagination and the intellect(that the soul is responsable for) needs sense
data everytime it needs to function*, so if the body do not work well, them
the sould is screwed.  
  
So it seems that the forms of dualism defended by philosophers, at least with
a religious mindset, can work well on this case. The only type of dualism i
can't see explaining it is the one you see on most fiction with superhumans or
magic were someone can turn into a fly or a bird, say, and still think. If the
soul can work well on these situations, brain damage should be easy.  
  
*St. Thomas even say that folks in heaven now only can think at all because God is making it possible, a bodyless soul would not be capable of it alone

Now, we are obligated by the moral law to try to realize this highest good.
And since _ought_ implies _can_ , it must be possible to realize it. Yet it is
obviously not realized in this life, since virtuous people often suffer and
evil people often live lives of comfort and pleasure. Moreover, Kant thinks,
its realization _cannot_ be guaranteed in this life, since there is, he
thinks, no inherent necessary correlation between the demands of the moral law
and the causal order that governs the natural world. We can make sense of such
a correlation only if we postulate a supreme being who brings the two orders
into correlation (in the afterlife).

Oh boy, the prussian would not exactly be a fan of being here XD  
  
"Yet Hume’s and Kant’s general epistemological and metaphysical views are
hardly uncontroversial, and many who suppose their critiques of natural
theology to be compelling would not accept them (if, indeed, they even know
much about them)."  
  
Perfect. If one uses their criticism while not really accepting their views
them you know that there is no serious thinker in front of you.  
  
And i do find Kant system very good to a atheist, probably the best dificult
to natural theology, but i admit that reading your post make me reconsider the
possibility of a kantian atheist, Dr. Feser.  
  
The kantian "moral argument" seemed kinda weak to me, for pratical and
theoretical reason could just be contradictory and that is all. But this would
seriously wreak the power of reason and the confidence on science and
morality, so yea, kantism loses its appeal(one might as well go to something
even more modest, like Hayek).

LAA  
  
Well, fellow Anon, you know what WCB means, right?  
"Winners Can't Believe". And since he's not a believer, he's a winner.  
  
I mean, such a strong act of destruction from his part, I now have to stop
believing in God, and turn Aquinas to ashes. Such a powerful act!  
  
LAA  
  
(LAA : Losers Are Atheist)

WCB  
  
@Talmid  
  
Down at the bottom of neoPlatonism is Parmenides. Parmenide's metaphysics gave
us the claims that change is impossible, and that the multiplicity of things
is illusionary. There is only "the one". The root of the metaphysical claim
that God is simple. Plato's dialogue "Parrmenides" is one of the oddest
writings on metaphysics ever. Parmenides claims that space and time are
illusionary and change is impossible. Where that leaves the evil of this world
is problematic.  
  
WCB

_Such, then, is the natural procedure of human reason_.  _It… looks around for
the concept of that which is independent of any condition, and finds it in
that which is itself the sufficient condition of all else, that is, in that
which contains all reality. But that which is all-containing and without
limits is absolute unity, and involves the concept of a single being that is
likewise the supreme being_. (pp. 495-97, Norman Kemp Smith translation)

It is widely supposed that Hume and Kant put paid to the arguments of natural
theology. But their critiques largely presuppose their background views in
epistemology and metaphysics. If you don’t buy those views (and I don’t) you
needn’t accept their critiques. Yet Hume’s and Kant’s general epistemological
and metaphysical views are hardly uncontroversial, and many who suppose their
critiques of natural theology to be compelling would not accept them (if,
indeed, they even know much about them).

Kant, by contrast, tied his critique of traditional metaphysics to an
essentially positive and optimistic view of what reason could accomplish.
True, he did not think reason could penetrate into the natures of things as
they are in themselves. Since that’s what traditional metaphysics claimed to
do, and natural theology is grounded in such metaphysics, his position entails
a critique of traditional metaphysics and natural theology. However, in Kant’s
view this entailed no doubts about the rational foundations of morality or of
science (which concerns the world as it appears to us rather than as it is in
itself). A consistent Humean has to put natural theology, natural science, and
ethics in the same boat. A consistent Kantian can leave natural theology in
the boat by itself.

Agreed! Hope we still have a lot of atheists* on the line. Very good
reflections.  
  
  
*and Kant

“As follows from these considerations,” Kant says, “the ideal of the supreme
being is nothing but a _regulative principle_ of reason, which directs us to
look upon all connection in the world _as if_ it originated from an all-
sufficient necessary cause” (p. 517). Note that Kant is not saying that this
ideal is an unavoidable useful _fiction_ , but rather that it is unavoidable
and useful even if (in his view) _unprovable_.

Book IV of Divine Names is even better because Dionysius modifies Proclus's
privation view of evil to be compatible with a Christian perspective. Proclus
doesn't think spiritual creatures can be evil, but Dionysius does.

 _if we can't draw any conclusions about things as they are, why are we even
bothering to try to talk about "things as they are"?_  
  
I concur: the distinction is extremely suspect. For one thing, is there any
"things as they ARE" **about** things "as they appear to us" (i.e. the
phenomena)? Or really, how could there NOT be any aspect to "things as they
appear to us" that "really are"? For instance, do they REALLY seem that way,
or is it "just an appearance?" How, indeed, could we speak **meaningfully**
about "things as they seem to us" without those things _having_
characteristics (even if only seeming so - they SEEM to have certain
characteristics, and that FACT is something _that is so_ even apart from
seeming). It is, further, utterly silly to simply posit the world of phenomena
being utterly divorced from "things as they really are", and then talk about
it with everyone else as if _your_ experience had ANY relationality with them
(or even their sheer existence). Your words would be (always) sheer gibberish
to everyone else, and (at best) only _seeming_ to you to have any sense at
all.  
  
It seems to have all the worst drawbacks of the "mind is merely electron
actions in neurons" approach, and then some.

_The concept of an_ ens realissimum _is therefore, of all concepts of possible
things, that which best squares with the concept of an unconditionally
necessary being; and… we have no choice in the matter, but find ourselves
constrained to hold to it…_

Of course, this does not means that we do not know ANYTHING about how things
really are, for Kant argued against things really having the characteristics
our innate structure puts on they, like the forms of space and time or the
categories like casuality. Read someday Sebastian Gardner book on Kant to get
the details, it is a very good account of Kant views and arguments.  
  
Academics do dispute the view that the thing-itself is a separate thing from
phenomena, the two-worlds interpretation, but i do feel like it gets close to
Kant intend. Specially if one see things like his defense of free will.  
  
About a way of making this view sound coherent, Schopenhauer did a good job of
deriving some conclusions about the thing-itself. Of all the germans, i still
do not know which took Kant view to the more coherent direction, but he got to
a interesting point.

_If we admit something as existing, no matter what this something may be, we
must also admit that there exists something which exists_ necessarily _. For
the contingent exists only under the condition of some other contingent
existence as its cause, and from this again we must infer yet another cause,
until we are brought to a cause which is not contingent, and which is
therefore unconditionally necessary_…

By no means does this make reasoning to such a divine first cause
superstitious or otherwise foolish. After all, Kant also thinks that the
notions of space and time apply only within the phenomenal world and not to
things as they are in themselves. You might think it _mistaken_ to suppose
that the notions of space and time apply to things as they are in themselves,
but few would regard it as superstitious, or irrational, or otherwise
contemptible to do so. By the same token, there is nothing superstitious,
irrational, or otherwise contemptible in the idea of a first uncaused cause,
even if one supposes, with Kant, that reason is incapable of validly drawing
the inference to it.

@Anon  
  
"It's hard for me to even understand why you would want to make such a
distinction except unless you were motivated by the desire to deny the force
of arguments for the existence of God."  
  
Well, Kant starts with the humean thesis that sense data can only generate
contigent knowledge. He quickly realized that empiricism is dumb, for we do
have necessary knowledge, so he was a sort of rationalist early. Necessary
knowledge comes from reason.  
  
But them Kant understood that sense data is pretty much how we have
information about reality, so if our necessary knowledge does not come from
the senses them it either:  
  
1\. Has no basis on reality and is mere play with definitions(which smart
empiricists do defend).  
  
2\. Come from something else.  
  
The prussian argued that at least mathematics is a sort of necessary knowledge
that is not created by language, so 2 won. His answer was that we can know
some truths about how we happen to organize sense data by analysing the
necessary conditions to our experience to it to be how it is. For instance,
every experience we have is in time, it has a sucession and all that, so we
can derive several truths about that(inded, mathematics would have his origin
on the forms of time and space).  
  
And so, by knowing this structure we could show that every possible experience
we could have need to obey a certain structure and so gather several truths
about how things appear to us. This method is worthless to know things we cant
empirically know, though.

Kant does not take this to be a strict proof of God’s existence, but rather an
argument to the effect that it is reasonable to affirm God’s existence. And
once again, the idea is not that theism involves believing something contrary
to reason, but quite the opposite. Affirming God’s existence is, in Kant’s
view, precisely what is called for in order to make sense of what reason
dictates in the realm of action.

WCB  
  
The moral nature of man argument. If God decides to create man. Including
mankind's moral nature.  
  
God has three choices  
1\. Create mankind with a bad moral nature.  
2\. Create mankind with an indifferent moral nature.  
3\. Create mankind with a good moral nature.  
  
Our God given moral nature constrains our free will the free will argument for
existence of moral evil fails. Creating mankind with an indifferent moral
nature does not confer free will on mankind, just gurantees moral evil will be
committed in this world.  
  
If God is good, just, merciful, compassionate, and wise and cares about us,
God must choose to create all mankind with the best moral nature possible.  
  
The Problem Of Evil is not really A Problem, but is many such little problems
that have no answers. Theology should be about logic if Theologians give us
claims without hard evidence. The hard evidence in this world is moral evil
exists. Logic such as above demonstrates theological opinions seem to be very
wrong. How many logical dead ends like this does an Atheist need to
acknowledge the God hypothesis of a wise, perfectly good God fails?  
  
WCB

WCN and Papalinton are the voices of reason and sanity here. I hsve learned so
much from them. Thank you guys.

IQ is not really a measure of intellect. Your misleading questions spring from
an incoherent "philosophy" also known a superstition.  
  
Tom Cohoe  

"The trouble with this sort of reasoning, Kant thinks, is not that its
conclusion is false – again, he was no atheist – but rather that, given his
epistemology, reason lacks the resources to transcend the empirical world and
prove the existence of a necessary or unconditioned being outside it. The
notion of causality, he argues, applies only within the phenomenal world, the
world of things as they appear to us, whereas reasoning to a necessary being
would require applying it beyond that world, to the noumenal world or things
as they are in themselves. And we cannot, in his view, know the latter."
Trouble is, if Kant is right, nobody can know he's right, including Kant.
Right?

Are there any book-length analyses of Kant's philosophy that you could
recommend from a Thomist?  
  
The only philosophy book I've read (so far) that gives an analysis of Kant is
Peter Kreeft's book "Socrates Meets Kant" (which is written as a fictional
dialog between those 2).  
  
I know that you (Feser) have addressed some of Kant's criticisms of Natural
Theology in your books, but I was wondering if you could recommend any
Thomists that have done more in-depth work on this.

 _It's hard for me to even understand why you would want to make such a
distinction except unless you were motivated by the desire to deny the force
of arguments for the existence of God._  
  
The motivation stems from Kant's attempt to respond to Humean skepticism. Kant
thinks metaphysical principles (e.g. every event must have a cause) can only
be justified in virtue of their expressing conditions of the possibility of
experience, viz. the conditions objects must satisfy in order to be objects of
experience _for us_. But this suggests the need to distinguish between two
says of considering objects, namely in relation to subjects with our forms of
cognition (things as they appear to us) and independently of such relations
(things as they are in themselves).  
  
Now, I'm not a Kantian, and I don't think his views are ultimately
satisfactory, but I hope this brief summary shows it isn't some misguided
attempt to undermine natural theology.

Kant was one of the world's greatest thinkers. He phillosophy foresaw quantum
mechanics.  
  
Kant did not view things-in-themselves as containing the sum of all
possibilities, and phenomena all actualities; but this duality is conformable
to Kant's metaphysics as to none other. As a contribution to the metaphysics
of possibility, the quantum mechanical wave function can easily be seen as
complementary to Kant's idea of things-in-themselves, where various kinds of
things can happen (like free will) that are not comprehensible in terms of
phenomenal reality. Kant would just have to allow that characteristics of
physical reality can intrude some depth into things-in-themselves, which he
would not have considered -- though we can also handle this by positing an
intermediate level of reality, between true unconditioned things-in-themselves
and true discrete phenomenal objects -- as Kant otherwise actually does
himself for space and time as "pure intuitions." The wave function straddles
the classic Kantian boundary, sharing some properties with phenomena, others,
as underlying phenomena, with things-in-themselves.  
  
Thus, where Kant would have considered all of phenomena governed by
determinism, we now see the wave function as deterministic, while the collapse
of waves into particles is random. Although chance in quantum mechanics has
often been argued as allowing for free will, a free cause is still a very
different thing from a random cause, which doesn't need mind or self or
intention. Moral freedom is thus still left among things-in-themselves. Kant
himself would have had difficulty placing randomness in his ontology, if he,
like Hume, believed that chance violates determinism. Since chance is now part
of the physics, it cannot be denied; but it also still remains a different
matter from purposive freedom.  
  
Kant's idea that space and time do not exist among things-in-themselves has
been curiously affirmed by Relativity and quantum mechanics. In Relativity,
time simply ceases to pass at the velocity of light: for photons that have
travelled to us as part of the Cosmic Background Radiation, time has stood
still for most of the history of the universe. On the other hand, quantum
mechanics now posits "non-locality," i.e. physical distances, and so the
limitation of the velocity of light in Relativity, don't seem to exist. This
means that although time may apply to the wave function, space may not. The
full empirical reality of space is only found among discrete particles and
objects.  
  
This curious result is the consequence of the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR)
Paradox, which was intended by Einstein as a reductio ad absurdum of quantum
mechanics. If, for instance, a positron and an election are both created from
an energetic photon, the conservation of angular momentum requires that one be
spinning one way, and the other the other. But the complementary spins are
equally probable for each particle. Thus, in quantum mechanical terms, the
wave functions of each particle divide without a discrete state being
determined. The particles might then separate to even cosmological distances,
but as soon as the spin of one particle is observed, the other particle must
have the opposite spin, which means that the wave function has collapsed
across those cosmological distances and caused the other particle to assume a
predictable spin. If this occurs instantaneously, it would violate the
limitation of the velocity of light in Special Relativity.  
  
This has now been shown to actually occur on the basis of Bell's Theorem (from
John Bell, 1928-1990), meaning that Quantum Mechanics does violate Special
Relativity by allowing instantaneous interactions across even cosmological
distances. However, once observed, processes must still obey Special
Relativity and the limitations of spatial distance, creating the kind of
duality described by Kant.  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Kant seems to consider that phenomena has a lower degree of existence than the
thing-itself while considering phenomena real, so it will depend on the view
that one takes on the relation between the two.  
  
If we take a two-worlds interpretation them i suppose that both phenomena and
noumena "are" but on diferent ways, so we need something like analogy. If we
take a two-aspects interpretation them it seems like they are just one thing,
so there is only a mode of existence. If we take something like S. Gardner
view, that we dont know the relation at all, them who knows.

"His argument doesn't work because he might have been wrong."  
  
Wow. Yet another devastating critique of the theistic tradition. Guess we
ought to just shot down the blog. WCB really has our number.

Even so, he does not regard the affirmation of God’s existence as groundless.
On the contrary, he famously argues that a rationale for affirming it is to be
found in practical rather than pure reason, in ethics rather than in
metaphysics. Just as reason seeks an ultimate explanation, so too, Kant argues
in the _Critique of Practical Reason_ , it seeks the highest good. And the
highest good, he argues, would be the conjunction of moral virtue, which makes
us worthy of happiness, with happiness itself.

All the same, precisely for that reason, Hume’s account of _philosophy_ , if
not of common sense, is essentially destructive. Moreover, a consistent Humean
will have to take a much more modest view of natural science than contemporary
atheists are wont to do – in part because of Hume’s attack on attempts to
justify induction, and in part because the deliverances of modern physics are
hardly less abstruse and remote from common life than the rationalist
speculations he was so keen to shoot down. A Humean must also give up a
rationalistic ethics, given that, as he famously holds, there is nothing
contrary to _reason_ (but only to the sentiments of the average person) to
prefer that the entire world be destroyed than that one should suffer a
scratch to his finger. Humean arguments entail a pessimism about the powers of
human reason that doesn’t sit well with scientism or with dogmatic and
triumphalist versions of atheism (even if many atheists and adherents of
scientism naively suppose otherwise).

WCB  
  
"WCB, this is a philosophy blog. We do philosophy here. If logical
demonstrations don’t qualify as “hard evidence” for you, you can go back to
Matt Dillihunty et al."  
  
Assertion alone are not anything more than assertions. Claims about souls are
based solely on unfounded assertions. Pointing that out is very much
philosophy.  
  
The problem is soul as a theory has problems as a concept.  
  
Consider this, Hiram. The village atheist has an IQ of 150. Danny the village
idiot has an IQ of 50. How does concept of soul account for this? Is it
Danny's soul that is intellectually deficient? Or does his deficient brain
throttle his soul's itellect? How about Hiram? Is his soul's real IQ 200?
Could it be we are all deficient as to our brains and withou that, we would
all have IQs of 200?  
  
How does soul interact with a human brain?  
Let's do some real philosophy here. This is an old issue extensively argued
over by many philosophers from the days of Descartes. No sound solution to
this issue was found despite mighty efforts of many philosophers. This is a
philosopy blog? Let's see some philosophy here.  
  
  
WCB

You know, i got a idea:  
  
"Moreover, Kant thinks, its realization cannot be guaranteed in this life,
since there is, he thinks, no inherent necessary correlation between the
demands of the moral law and the causal order that governs the natural world.
We can make sense of such a correlation only if we postulate a supreme being
who brings the two orders into correlation (in the afterlife)".  
  
Can't not one, in a wink to Schopenhauer, use this reasoning to get as well to
something more eastern like a sort of moksha? It would require a
pantheist/panentheist deity being the thing-itself and a completely detached
moral life(Kantian ethics meet the Gita!) would help one become one with God
and all that.  
  
Besides not being atheistic, a weakness of it when compared with theist
kantism is that it would not be capable of having objective morality, for
there is no real "I" that is the author of my acts, but it could make Kant
argument less probable.

Try Etienne Gilson's The Unity of Philosophical Experience, which includes a
penetrating analysis of modern philosophy, including Kant, from a Thomist
perspective

I'm no trained philosopher, but Kant's phenomenal/noumenal distinction seems
really suspicious to me. It's hard for me to even understand why you would
want to make such a distinction except unless you were motivated by the desire
to deny the force of arguments for the existence of God.  
  
I don't get how the nouminal world can really be "things as they are" if they
are entirely causally inert with respect to how we perceive things. This seems
like a very "russel's teapot" kind of situation where if we can't draw any
conclusions about things as they are, why are we even bothering to try to talk
about "things as they are"?

