Smilansky, Saul. " Reversing Pascal's Wager: Scepticism About Religious Belief
and Its Value ", Religious Studies (forthcomin...

Pascal famously argued that practical reasoning should lead people to try to
form within themselves a commitment to religious practice and obedience, based
upon a belief in God. I propose to take a less ambitious argument, which I
call the Sensible Argument, and use it to present The Puzzle. I argue that
there is a huge puzzle here, about the radical dissonance between the beliefs
and practices of many of the purportedly religious. There are, I will argue,
good reasons to doubt, concerning many (clearly not all or indeed most)
purported religious believers, whether they are indeed believers, or at least
whether their beliefs are strong; and religion seems to greatly increase the
risks of deception, duplicity, and hypocrisy, as well as self-deception and
inauthenticity. By turning towards a religious form of life, one will
therefore be adding great morality-related risks. Arguably, if there is a God
who deeply cares about individual moral behaviour, he would punish religious
moral transgressors more than the secular ones. One is unlikely to be saved
from hell (or other severe divine punishment) by becoming religious. If one is
going to wager, it seems much more sensible to wager on the secular side.

> Abstract: A prominent Thomistic cosmological argument maintains that an
> infinite regress of causes, which exhibits a certain pattern of ontological
> dependence among its members, would be vicious and so must terminate in a
> first member. Interestingly, Jonathan Schaffer offers a similar argument in
> the contemporary grounding literature for the view called metaphysical
> foundationalism. I consider the striking similarities between both arguments
> and conclude that both are unsuccessful for the same reason. I argue this
> negative result gives us indirect reason to consider metaphysical infinitism
> as a genuine possibility, the view that chains of ontological dependence or
> ground can descend indefinitely.
>
>  
>  
>

Upshot: Cogent modal ontological arguments (at least ones friendly to
classical theism) seem to have no suitable home in the metaphysics and
epistemology of modality.

Which view is correct: the substance-first view or the property-first view?
This question has potentially huge implications for the disagreement between
theists and non-theists.[1] This is because, prima facie, _orthodox monotheism
entails the substance-first view._ And this in turn is because, prima facie,
_God_ is a substance, and is prior to all else that exists. Therefore, if
there are reasons to prefer the property-first view, then there are thereby
reasons to prefer non-theism to theism.

[1] There are other views that are equally powerful threats to theism, such as
a stuff-first view, according to which stuffs are more fundamental than
substances. Another is Jason Turner's facts-first ontology (as well as related
events-first ontologies). However, I leave these sort of threats to the side
for the present post.

My second worry is the one I want to briefly focus on in this post. The worry
is that it fails to get at what is potentially a deeper distinction, and one
that's potentially more illuminating than the distinction between physicalism
and supernaturalism. The distinction I have in mind is at the level of _basic
ontological categories_ and _categorical priority_ \-- in particular, the
level of the ontological priority of the categories of _substance_ and
_property_. According to a standard and historically prominent view,
substances are more fundamental than properties (or at least: substances are
no less fundamental than properties). Accordingly, let's call this sort of
view _a substance-first ontology_.

> Physicalism is the view that the physical is fundamental -- everything is
> either physical or dependent upon/grounded in the physical. By contrast
> supernaturalism/mentalism is the view that one or more
> spiritual/mental/supernatural beings are more fundamental than the physical
> -- everything is either mental or dependent upon the mental.

The evidence for fine-tuning confirms both demiurgism and panentheism over
theism, and in this way is good evidence against theism. This is because the
intuitive and empirical evidence against creation _ex nihilo_ creates a strong
drag on theism’s prior probability not suffered by demiurgism and panentheism,
and so they lap the former in terms of posterior probability. _A fortiori_ ,
the posterior probability of the inclusive disjunction of demiurgism and
panentheism is considerably higher than that of theism given the evidence of
fine-tuning.

> The Christian and Islamic doctrine of the VIRGIN BIRTH claim God asexually
> impregnated the Virgin Mary with Jesus, Mary's impregnation was fully
> consensual (VIRGIN CONSENT), and God never acts immorally (DIVINE GOODNESS).
> First, I show that God's actions and Mary's background beliefs undermine her
> consent by virtue of coercive incentives, Mary's comparative powerlessness,
> and the generation of moral conflicts. Second, I show that God's non-
> disclosure of certain reasonably relevant facts undermines Mary's informed
> consent. Third, I show that a recent attempt by Jack Mulder to rescue VIRGIN
> CONSENT fails. As DIVINE GOODNESS and VIRGIN CONSENT are more central to
> orthodoxy, Christians and Muslims have powerful reason to reject VIRGIN
> BIRTH.

Why does anything exist? Because qualities exist and they're necessary beings
that exist _a se_.

> According to mereological bundle theory, the world (here, I need not confine
> myself to the physical world, so by ‘‘world’’ I mean the whole world, not
> just the cosmos) is a vast mixture of properties, some with a single
> location (whether in configuration space, or in spacetime, or in something
> else), some with many locations, some located everywhere, and perhaps even
> some without any location at all (Locations are defined by n-adic
> properties. For simplicity, take the fundamental space to be relational, and
> define up ‘‘points’’ in the space using these relations and properties). The
> world is constructed from arrangements of properties and relations that are
> fused together to make things of all sorts: concrete objects, abstract
> objects, events, states of affairs, facts, fields, regions, and anything
> else there is. So, according to the mereological bundle theorist, fields,
> particles, entangled systems of particles, spaces, molecules, cells, bodies,
> persons and societies are all constructed, most fundamentally, from fusions
> of properties and relations. (Paul, "Building the World From Its Fundamental
> Constituents", p. 242).

Why does _this_ universe exist? By NMPSR, absent a good reason to think
otherwise, we should assume _all_ possible universe quality fusions exist
inevitably and necessarily within the world-whole of qualities, and this is
one of them.[4]

I think a naturalist who adopts Paul's one-category ontology can exploit her
account to explain the existence and fine-tuning of our universe. To start,
consider that if we assume with Paul that the world-whole is just the sum of
all qualities, and they can combine in various ways in accordance with the
constraints of their intrinsic natures, _what prevents them from combining in
every possible such way_? It would be mysterious why they fuse/bundle in some
ways and not others if they didn't fuse/bundle in every way consistent with
their natures. Paul's one-category ontology thus naturally generates pressure
to accept a mereology-focused variant of Spinoza's negative PSR:

> ...consider the wave-function realist who takes the world-whole to be a
> wavefunction. On the GRW theory of the world, the world is a universal wave
> function that evolves in accordance with the dynamical laws. Understood in
> terms of mereological bundle theory, the wavefunction is the fusion of
> amplitude and phase properties (along with any other properties of the
> system) with structuring properties or relations, including the structuring
> relations described by Schrodinger’s equation and by the collapse postulate.
> A variant of this view can fit the Everettian approach, and one can also fit
> David Albert’s (1996) treatment of Bohmian mechanics by adding a world-
> particle that is simply a fusion of properties to the plurality of things. (
> _Ibid_., p. 254).

[1] On Paul's account, the relation of mereological bundling here is not a
fundamentally spatiotemporal one of spatiotemporal parts composing a
spatiotemporal whole. This is because contemporary physics seems to have shown
that spacetime isn't fundamental (think, for example, of wave function realism
with respect to quantum mechanics, theories of quantum gravity that take
spacetime to be emergent, etc.).

[3] As Paul points out, her one-category ontology is compatible with a parts-
to-whole mosaic, as well as a holistic whole-to-parts picture. She prefers the
latter because it's a better fit with with quantum holism/entanglement
phenomena.

Given NMPSR, then, we should assume that all possible bundles/fusions exist in
the world-whole. If so, then we can explain everything the theist wants
explained:

Paul's one category ontology provides a nice an ontological framework for
contemporary physics:

> On my view, matter, concrete objects, abstract objects, and perhaps even
> spacetime are constructed from mereological fusions of qualities, so the
> world is simply a vast mixture of qualities, including polyadic properties
> (i.e., relations). This means that everything there is, including concrete
> objects like persons or stars, is a quality, a qualitative fusion, or a
> portion of the extended qualitative fusion that is the world-whole. I call
> my view _mereological bundle theory_. (Paul, "A One Category Ontology", p.
> 2)

[2] Question: How does a quality become spatiotemporally localized on Paul's
view? Answer: By bundling with spatiotemporal properties/relations: "Objects
may have their locations in virtue of being fused with whatever location
properties and relations there are that define the actual space of the world,
and many objects will have a physical structure in virtue of having location
properties and relations as parts of their fusions, or in virtue of being part
of a larger fusion which has location properties and relations as parts. The
character of the space might not be what we take the character of ordinary
spacetime to be, but the structure of the space is generated by fusing
qualitative properties with relevant properties and relations that define the
space as determined by modern physics. Hence, the view is consistent with (and
explicitly accommodating of) various approaches in modern physics: it is
friendly to structuralism, and is perfectly consistent with realist
interpretations of the ontology of quantum mechanics, for example, with
realism about the wavefunction." (Paul, Building the World From Its
Fundamental Constituents", p. 242).

Why does a universe exist? Because (as we know from our observations of the
actual world) there is a compossible distribution of qualities in some
"region" of the world-whole that comprises a universe. So by that fact and
NMPSR, there is a presumption to think that it is _inevitable_ that there is a
_fusion/bundle_ of those properties -- i.e., a mereological fusion of
qualities that make up a configuration space, along with a fusion of phase and
amplitude properties, that compose a universal wavefunction. From non-
spatiotemporal property configurations like this, you necessarily get
spatiotemporal universes that logically supervene upon them.[3]

> _Negative Mereological PSR (NMPSR)_ : a given plurality of qualities will
> fuse/bundle unless there is a sufficient reason for why they do not.

Paul's one category ontology provides a nice ontological framework for
contemporary physics:

> On my view, matter, concrete objects, abstract objects, and perhaps even
> spacetime are constructed from mereological fusions of qualities, so the
> world is simply a vast mixture of qualities, including polyadic properties
> (i.e., relations). This means that everything there is, including concrete
> objects like persons or stars, is a quality, a qualitative fusion, or a
> portion of the extended qualitative fusion that is the world-whole. I call
> my view mereological bundle theory. (Paul, "A One Category Ontology", p. 2)

Paul's hypothesis of a one-category ontology is much more parsimonious than
theism's, which posits irreducible substances -- and irreducibly different
_kinds_ of substances -- in addition to qualities. It also also has wider
scope than theism, as it can explain God (if there is a god) in terms of a
fusion of qualities. It can also explain the existence of God in terms of a
derivative being that supervenes upon the modal space of qualities.
Unfortunately, the latter two claims are incompatible with classical theism,
as they violate the doctrine of divine simplicity and both conjuncts of the
aseity-sovereignty doctrine (i.e., the doctrine that (i) God is an absolutely
independent being, dependent upon/derivative of nothing and (ii) everything
distinct from God depends upon her for their existence). All else being equal,
then, a one-category ontology of qualities is a more plausible theory of
ultimate reality than theism.

> ...consider the wave-function realist who takes the world-whole to be a
> wavefunction. On the GRW theory of the world, the world is a universal wave
> function that evolves in accordance with the dynamical laws. Understood in
> terms of mereological bundle theory, the wavefunction is the fusion of
> amplitude and phase properties (along with any other properties of the
> system) with structuring properties or relations, including the structuring
> relations described by Schrodinger’s equation and by the collapse postulate.
> A variant of this view can fit the Everettian approach, and one can also fit
> David Albert’s (1996) treatment of Bohmian mechanics by adding a world-
> particle that is simply a fusion of properties to the plurality of things.
> (Ibid., p. 254).

Abstract: Christian orthodoxy essentially involves the acceptance of the New
Testament as authoritative in matters of faith and conduct. However, the New
Testament instructs slaves and women to accept a subordinate status that
denies their equality with other human beings. To accept such a status is to
have the vice of servility, which involves denying the equality of all human
beings. Therefore the New Testament asserts that slaves and women should deny
their equality with other human beings. This is false. Moreover, these same
passages in the New Testament implicitly assert that slavery and the
subordination of women are morally permissible. This is also false. Therefore
orthodox Christianity is false.

There are infinitely many decohering branches of the universal wave function,
such that infinitely many branches contain gratuitous evil.

Here's a summary of the paper from the editors' introduction to the book:

> John Teehan looks in more detail at the problem of evil, a classic challenge
> to theism in philosophy of religion. This problem has received a lot of
> attention in mainstream philosophy of religion, and according to Teehan,
> cognitive science can further strengthen it. He shows this by considering
> the features of our evolved morality. Traditionally, the fact that humans
> have some unlearned (probably innate) sense of what is right and wrong has
> been regarded as evidence for theism; see, for example, formulations of the
> moral argument by Swinburne (2004). A crucial and often-overlooked feature
> of evolved morality is that it is an in-group adaptation. As a result,
> humans are more morally sensitive to those they consider in-group members,
> and conversely, they can be indifferent or cruel to those they consider part
> of the out-group. Teehan surveys empirical evidence for this, for instance,
> that people are less empathetic toward people who experience pain if they
> believe them to be out-group members (e.g., of different ethnic groups).
> This suggests that some moral evil, such as prejudice, between-group
> violence, and dehumanization, results from a properly working system of
> evolved moral cognition. This presents a challenge to theism. Teehan
> proceeds to consider some theodicies and argues that none is successful.

Abstract: The challenge from religious diversity is widely thought to be one
of the most important challenges facing religious belief. Despite this
consensus, however, many epistemologists think that standard versions of the
challenge fail because they threaten to implicate many seemingly reasonable
yet highly controversial non-religious beliefs. In light of this we develop an
alternative, less discussed, diversity challenge that does not generalize.
This challenge concerns why so much religious diversity exists in the first
place given common religious, and in particular theistic, views. Although
there are some interesting scientific explanations of such diversity,
satisfying theistic explanations of its existence are still required.

Abstract: Problem one: why, if God designed the human mind, did it take so
long for humans to develop theistic concepts and beliefs? Problem two: why
would God use evolution to design the living world when the discovery of
evolution would predictably contribute to so much nonbelief in God? Darwin was
aware of such questions but failed to see their evidential significance for
theism. This paper explores this significance. Problem one introduces
something I call natural nonbelief, which is significant because it parallels
and corroborates well-known worries about natural evil. Problems one and two,
especially when combined, support naturalism over theism, intensify the
problem of divine hiddenness, challenge Alvin Plantinga’s views about the
naturalness of theism, and advance the discussion about whether the conflict
between science and religion is genuine or superficial

Abstract: An evolutionary by-product explanation entails that religious belief
is an unintended consequence of a cognitive process selected for by evolution.
In this paper, I argue that if a by-product explanation is true, then
religious belief is unwarranted (even if God exists). In particular, I argue
that if the cause of religious belief is the god-faculty (HADD + ToM + eToM +
MCI), then it is likely unreliable; thus, religious belief is unwarranted.
Plantinga argues that de jure criticisms are not independent of de facto
criticisms: without knowing whether or not God exists, one can’t say that
belief in God is unwarranted, since if God exists, it is possible that God has
planned that this mechanism would lead to belief in Him. Against Plantinga, I
show that in order for de jure criticisms to have force, it is not necessary
to know that God does not exist. Instead, one only needs to doubt His
existence. And if by-product explanations turn out to be supported by the
evidence, this fact alone gives us reason to doubt God’s existence. Thus, if
the by-product explanation is true, belief in God is not warranted; if we know
this, then we have reason to doubt theism.

Conclusion: "...the paradoxicality of divine omniscience, by the lights of
Grim-style considerations, resides in a heretofore undertheorized feature of
God’s knowledge: God’s status as a being of perfect rationality from a logical
point of view."

Abstract: The divine purpose theory —according to which that human life is
meaningful to the extent that it fulfills some purpose or plan to which God
has directed us—encounters well-known Euthyphro problems. Some theists attempt
to avoid these problems by appealing to God’s essential goodness, à la the
modified divine command theory of Adams and Alston. However, recent criticisms
of the modified DCT show its conception of God’s goodness to be incoherent;
and these criticisms can be shown to present an analogous set of problems for
the DPT. Further, the argument can be extended to any account of
meaningfulness according to which the value of what humans do can only be
conferred by God. Thus, it would seem that there is no tenable version of the
view that meaningfulness is conferred on human life by some act or attitude of
God’s.

Similarly for Stage Two cosmological arguments. A generic example of a Stage
Two cosmological argument runs (very roughly) as follows: The necessary being
at the foundation of reality must be an absolutely unlimited being. For
(assuming we can show that a necessary being doesn't have essential internal
limits that are knowable, if at all, a posteriori) the only way that a being
could have limits is if there were some other entity that limited it, and yet
we are talking about the foundation of reality, where (assuming we could show
that there is only one "plank" in reality's foundation) there is nothing
external around to limit it. So it must have unlimited attributes, where these
include the personal attributes mentioned above (Why not also unlimited _non-
personal_ attributes, such as infinite spatial extension? Spinoza must be
rolling in his grave.). But as with Plantinga's modal ontological argument,
what is left unstated yet assumed is that personal attributes are or can be
_basic_ or _foundational_ , _ground-floor properties_ , and not _derivative_ ,
_non-foundational properties_. But as we've seen, such an assumption is
contrary to all experience (or at least our best theories), in which case
there are non-trivial worries that a personal foundation of at least _that_
sort may well be impossible. So it's completely question-begging against at
least certain standard pictures of naturalism.

A standard objection to such arguments is that it's not at all clear that such
properties are individually possible and/or collectively compossible. But I
want to raise a deeper problem that, so far as I've been able to tell, has
never been put directly. The problem is that such arguments not only assume
that such properties are compossible, but also that they are instantiable as
_basic_ or _foundational_ properties. But of course the non-theist will have
principled worries, based on what they take to be our best theories about the
world, that personal attributes are not properties that can be instantiated as
basic our foundational properties -- i.e. they're not ground-floor properties,
but rather _derivative_ properties that are grounded (at least in part) in the
physical. They will thus have non-trivial, substantive worries that it's
_metaphysically impossible_ for personal attributes to exist at the
metaphysical ground floor -- at least unaccompanied by physical properties (or
whatever the physical is ultimately composed of).

What about a liberal naturalist like myself? I'm in print as having Russellian
monist -- indeed, priority cosmopsychist -- sympathies. But even on _that_
view, physical characteristics are _also_ fundamental, and _essentially_ so.
So we can't get support for the theistic picture from there, either.

It's common to see arguments in philosophy of religion that aim to establish
the existence of a perfect being, where the perfections are taken to be
maximal expressions of a special subset of personal qualities (e.g.,
omnipotence, omniscience, and moral perfection). Standard arguments include
ontological arguments and so-called "Stage Two" reasoning in cosmological
arguments.

Sixth, the evidence against theism appears to be _systemic,_ comprising __
facts about: the nature of _abstracta_ and _concreta_ ; the nature, origin,
and general structure of the universe; the nature, origin, and history of
life; the nature of consciousness; the nature, origin, biology, and psychology
of human beings; the nature, origins, and dynamics of religions and religious
experience; the existence and nature of morality; the meaning of life; the
aesthetics of the universe; epistemic phenomena; the concept of God and the
properties such a god would have; divine hiddenness; evil; etc. In short,
virtually every major aspect of reality and our knowledge of it seems to point
_away_ from theism and towards some form of naturalism. Prima facie, then,
naturalism appears to be a comprehensive theory of reality that best embodies
the theoretical virtues (e.g., simplicity, scope, conservatism, etc.). To
overcome the case for atheism, therefore, theists have much more work to do
besides attacking this or that argument against theism. In particular, theists
need to generate a rival explanation of the data above that embodies the
theoretical virtues better than naturalism. It's not at all clear that they
can succeed.

Some things worthy of note. First, there are very many more arguments for
atheism than commonly supposed. Second, while categorization is inevitably
somewhat arbitrary, there are clearly very many more _types_ of atheistic
arguments than commonly supposed -- on my reckoning, 20 other types of
atheistic argument besides the problem of evil. Third, about 120 atheistic
arguments (roughly 75%) have nothing to do with the problem of evil --
problems of evil are in the minority. Fourth, the list doesn't include
arguments specifically against orthodox Christianity. If it did, the list
would be considerably longer. Fifth, the case for atheism doesn't at all
depend on the success of the problem of evil.

Finally, it needs to be said that most people who care about arguments for and
against theism are adherents of some form of orthodox religious monotheism or
other. Among such groups, it's typically thought that the case for their faith
must be persuasive, such that no (or almost no) mature, rational, properly
functioning human being who appraised the relevant evidence could non-culpably
fail to believe after assessing it (on the grounds that (i) God holds people
morally responsible for their belief, and (ii) God would be less than
perfectly good if he held people morally responsible for their belief if the
evidence were less than persuasive). Thus, consider some rational, mature,
properly functioning adult agnostic, Joe _,_ who has strongly grasped,
internalized, and carefully appraised the above arguments, as well as all the
arguments for theism on the other side of the ledger. Suppose further that
after long and careful reflection, Joe finds the grounds for atheism to be
either stronger than those for theism, or at best, counterbalanced with them.
Finally, suppose that Joe thereby either disbelieves or suspends judgement
about theism. According to the group of theists specified just above, there
can be no one like Joe: The evidence for orthodox monotheism is _so_ good that
for _any_ person _S,_ if _S_ is a rational, mature, properly functioning
agent, and __ (after careful reflection and deliberation) _S_ fails to find
the evidence to support theism over atheism, or if _S_ merely finds the
evidence to be _counterbalanced_ \-- or indeed, if _S_ finds themself _unable
to tell,_ with any confidence, which way the evidence points -- then _S_ is
_morally culpable_ for failing to believe in the relevant version of orthodox
monotheism. In light of the case for atheism expressed in the arguments listed
above, this looks to be implausible, if not ridiculous.

4\. _Defeasible PMC_ : Normally, individuals and stuffs with originating or
sustaining efficient causes have originating or sustaining material causes,
respectively.

6\. _Bayesian PMC_ : Theories that conform to PMC have a much higher prior
probability than those that fail to conform to PMC.

3\. _Standard PMC_ : All individuals and stuffs that have an originating or
sustaining efficient cause have an originating or sustaining material cause,
respectively.

2\. _Strong De Re PMC_ : All individuals and stuffs (in the _actual_ world)
are such that, necessarily, _they_ have an originating or sustaining material
cause whenever they have an originating or sustaining efficient cause,
respectively.

There are at least seven versions of the principle of material causality:

1\. _Strong De Dicto PMC_ : Necessarily, all individuals and stuffs that have
an originating or sustaining efficient cause have an originating or sustaining
material cause, respectively.

From each principle, one can generate a defensible version of the problem of
creation _ex nihilo_. There are therefore at least seven defensible versions
of the problem of creation _ex nihilo_ for theism.  
  

5\. _IBE PMC_ : Theories that conform to PMC are more theoretically virtuous
than those that fail to conform to PMC.

7\. _Weak PMC_ : Possibly, all individuals and stuffs that have an originating
or sustaining efficient cause have an originating or sustaining material
cause, respectively.

> S1. The deity is not a natural object of any human passion.

> S3. If a being is not a natural object of the moral sentiments, then it
> cannot have moral attributes (either virtues or vices).

> Hume has two distinct lines of argument for strong moral atheism. One
> appeals to his account of the natural ambit of our human passions along with
> his sentimentalist metaphysics of morals in order to conclude that the first
> cause or designer is beyond the projected, response- dependent world of
> moral properties. According to this argument from sentimentalism our natural
> feelings of approval and disapproval range only so far as the outer frontier
> of sense and imagination. The projected properties of virtue and vice are
> thus confined to the immanent world, and cannot characterize any
> transcendental order beyond this permanent horizon (see Chapters 3 and 4).
> (p. 209)

> Hume’s second argument also turns on facts about sentimental psychology,
> though this time the emphasis is on the deity’s own sentiments and passions
> (if indeed it has any). This argument from motivation appeals to Hume’s
> account of the passions as the engines of action along with a form of
> probabilistic reasoning about the likely character of any first cause or
> ultimate organizing principle responsible for the ordered universe.
> According to Hume, even though we know nothing substantive about the
> distinctive intrinsic character of the original cause of all, we can judge
> it highly unlikely that this being or principle has anything like our own
> sentimental psychology. But if the deity lacks some sort of approximately
> anthropomorphic sentimental psychology, it will not be moved by moral
> concerns: weak moral atheism follows. Moreover, without an approximately
> human-like system of passions, the deity’s behavior will be unintelligible
> in human terms—and for Hume this is sufficient to place this being or
> principle beyond the sphere of moral assessable beings: strong moral atheism
> also follows (see Chapter 5). ( _Ibid_.)

Holden states the argument from sentimentalism a bit more carefully as
follows:

> (M1) In order to be morally assessable, a being must have a sentimental
> psychology sufficiently similar to that of human beings.
>
> Therefore,
>
> (M2) If the first cause lacks a sentimental psychology sufficiently similar
> to that of human beings, the first cause is not morally assessable.
>
> (M3) The first cause does, most likely, lack a sentimental psychology
> sufficiently similar to that of human beings.
>
> Therefore,
>
> (M4) The first cause is, most likely, not morally assessable.

> S4. The deity cannot have moral attributes (either virtues or vices). (p.
> 51)

The problem of many-over-one asks how it can be that many properties are ever
instantiated by one object. A putative solution might, for example, claim that
the properties are appropriately bundled, or somehow tied to a bare
particular. In this essay, the author argues that, surprisingly, an extant
candidate solution to this problem is at the same time an independently
developed candidate solution to the mind-body problem. Specifically, what is
argued here to be the best version of the relata-specific bundle theory—the
thesis that each instance of compresence has a special intrinsic nature in
virtue of which it necessarily bundles its specific bundle-ees—is also a
species of Russellian monism, labeled by David Chalmers as ‘constitutive
Russellian panprotopsychism’. The upshot of this connection is significant for
the metaphysics of the mind-body problem: a credible theory of property
instantiation turns out to have a built-in account of how consciousness is
grounded in certain (broadly) physical systems.

There is a longstanding argument that purports to show that divine
foreknowledge is inconsistent with human freedom to do otherwise. Proponents
of this argument, however, have for some time been met with the following
reply: the argument posits what would have to be a mysterious non-causal
constraint on freedom. In this paper, I argue that this objection is misguided
– not because after all there can indeed be non-causal constraints on freedom
(as in Pike, Fischer, and Hunt), but because the success of the
incompatibilist’s argument does not require the real possibility of non-causal
constraints on freedom. I contend that the incompatibilist’s argument is best
seen as showing that, given divine foreknowledge, something makes one unfree –
and that this something is most plausibly identified, not with the
foreknowledge itself, but with the causally deterministic factors that would
have to be in place in order for there to be infallible foreknowledge in the
first place.

Here are a few snippets that give one a sense of how the story goes for
deductive inference:

I hope this is enough to get you to read the article in full.

And here's a snippet that gives one a sense of how the story goes with
(supposed) _a priori_ truths:

Gendler also persuasively argues that **the rationalist can do no better**
than the hypothetico-deductivist in explaining _a priori_ knowledge. Here’s a
snippet from the last page or so:

Abstract: The Principle of Sufficient Reason (PSR) has been linked to a
variety of esoteric views in metaphysics. This paper explores another PSR
trail through the metaphysical backwoods, this time a path from theistic
idealism to substance monism. In particular, I will claim that the same style
of argument that might be offered for a Leibnizian form of metaphysical
idealism actually leads beyond idealism to something closer to Spinozistic
monism. Our road begins with a set of theological commitments about the nature
and perfection of God that were widely shared among leading early modern
philosophers. From these commitments, there arises an interesting case for
metaphysical idealism, roughly the thesis that only minds and mind-dependent
states actually exist. However, I will argue, that same theistic reasoning
also leads to an idealist form of substance monism, the view that God is the
only actual substance and that almost everything else is merely an intentional
object in God’s mind.

1\. If we affirm sanspsychism then we should embrace moral skepticism.

Step 2: If she should affirm that she has no good reason to think that our
morality is God’s morality, then she should reject N.

Second, a naturalist might object to Step 1 of Option (b). Here one can
reiterate the ways (mentioned in Section 3) in which a naturalist might reason
that human morality overlaps with God’s if God should turn out to exist. By
way of reminder, they were as follows: (i) If the moral rules are those that
any rational, autonomous agent would construct, and God is also a rational,
autonomous agent, then prima facie, our morality overlaps with God’s; (ii) the
moral rules we’ve discovered apply to at least humans. But if theism is true,
then humans are made in God’s image, which presumably includes his likeness in
rational and moral respects. There is therefore a presumption for thinking
that our morality overlaps with God’s.

4\. If we assent to C, then we should affirm sanspsychism.

5\. So, if we assent to C then we should refrain from affirming N. (4,3 HS)

Given this reconstruction of Coley’s argument, is there any way in which a
naturalist might sensibly resist it? In the remainder of the paper, I will
sketch some possible replies to the first two premises of the argument on
behalf of the sanspsychist.

Regarding Steps 1 and 5: One might be tempted to object to Step 1 on the
grounds that there are plenty of sanspsychists who are living counterexamples
to it, e.g., moral relativists, nihilists, and various sorts of non-
cognitivists. However, remember that Coley can safely screen these cases off,
as (i) he has explicitly restricted the relevant class of sanspsychists to
those who want to advance an argument from evil or divine hiddenness, and (ii)
(Coley argues that) such sanspsychists can only do so if they also assert both
that there are facts about human morality and that human morality overlaps
with God’s morality (if God exists). Having said that, however, it’s not clear
to me that such restrictions screen off all relevant meta-ethical theories
available to the type of sanspsychists at issue. Here I have in mind Kantian
constructivist accounts. Versions include those articulated by Kant,
Korsgaard, Rawls, and Scanlon. According to at least some of these versions,
there are constitutive features of rational, autonomous agents from which a
set of categorical imperatives necessarily flows. But if so, then if God is
also a rational, autonomous agent, and we are supposed to be made in His
image, then perhaps more should be said about why a sanspsychist can’t appeal
to such meta-ethical theories to support normative premises in arguments from
evil and divine hiddenness.

I can think of four steps in this sub-argument that the non-theist might
reject, viz., steps 1, 3, 4, and 5.

What to make of this argument? I can imagine a naturalist raising concerns for
the reasoning with both options. First, she might worry about Step 2 for both
Option (a) and Option (b). This is because it’s prima facie constitutive of
classical theism that God is morally perfect, that God has revealed moral
obligations and prohibitions to humans (through special revelation,
conscience, and perhaps other ways), and that a number of these apply to God
as well. But if so, then to consistently assert the normative premise of the
problem of evil, they need merely point out that theism implies that the
states of affairs at issue are morally bad, and that God’s moral perfection
implies that God can’t permit them without sufficient reason. It therefore
seems that even a naturalist who is a moral nihilist could consistently affirm
the premises of a version of the problem of evil without committing to the
truth of the moral claims involved.

2’. Therefore, If the sanspsychist should embrace moral skepticism or Railton-
style moral realism, then she should reject N.

Step 1: If the sanspsychist should embrace Railton-style moral realism, then
she should affirm that she has no good reason to think that our morality is
God’s morality.

ii. But see Bonjour (1999), Huemer (2016), Chudnoff (2013), and Bengson (2015)
for recent defenses.

Step 3: If we should affirm that evolutionary selective pressures are
connected to the moral facts, then we should embrace Railton-style moral
realism.

Step 3: Therefore, if the sanspsychist should embrace Railton-style moral
realism, then she should reject N.

Other (natural and) non-natural moral realists resist this horn of Street’s
Darwinian dilemma in other ways. For example, Erik Wielenberg argues that
while evolution didn’t select for knowledge of moral truths, it selected for
something else that is adaptive and which correlates with moral truths. In
particular, he argues that creatures with cognitive capacities like ours
thereby have rights. But evolution didn’t select for this knowledge. Rather,
it selected for our cognitive capacities, which in turn help us survive and
reproduce. But creatures with such capacities are thereby able to grasp the
concept of a right, and to come to believe that they have them.

Step 2: If we should embrace moral realism, then we should affirm that either
selective evolutionary pressures are connected to the moral facts or they
aren’t.

2\. If we should embrace moral skepticism then we should reject N.

What to make of Coley’s argument? An initial question concerns (1) as
currently stated. For Coley grants that at least some versions of moral
realism are ultimately compatible with sanspsychism, viz., Peter Railton’s
moral naturalism and those relevantly similar to it. Of course we’ve seen that
Coley argues that Railton-style moral realism provides no help in supporting
N. However, I’m not so sure about that, for reasons I’ll discuss below.
Therefore, let us modify Coley’s (1) and (2) accordingly to take account of
this other type of meta-ethical option allowed for the sanspsychist. The
argument then runs as follows:

The bulk of the paper can then be seen as a defense of premises (1’) and (2’)
of the reconstructed argument above.

For what it's worth, I was the commenter on an earlier version of Coley's
paper at the 2018 SPR meeting. Below are the comments I presented at that
meeting.

5\. So, if we assent to C, then we should refrain from affirming N. (4,3 HS)

Step 1: If the sanspsychist should embrace moral skepticism, then she should
(thereby) doubt the reliability of human moral cognition.

Step 5: If we should affirm that moral realism is defeated by Street’s
evolutionary debunking argument, then we should embrace moral skepticism.

> The levers of natural selection are random genetic mutation, fitness for
> survival, and reproductive success. Defenders of the evolutionary debunking
> account (EDA) hold that such mechanisms aren’t likely to produce cognitive
> faculties that reliably form true moral beliefs. So, according to EDA, given
> that our cognitive faculties are a product of unguided natural selection, we
> should be in doubt about the reliability of our moral cognition. Let the
> term ‘sanspsychism’ describe the view that no supramundane consciousness
> exists. In arguing against theism, some sanspsychists advance a normative
> claim about the moral significance of phenomena like sentient suffering. But
> if no supramundane consciousness exists, our cognitive faculties are a
> product of unguided natural selection. It follows that if EDA is correct,
> the sanspsychist should not think that our moral cognition is reliable. So
> unless the sanspsychist has a defeater for EDA, she should not think herself
> justified in appealing to normative reasons for denying the existence of
> God.

Let us now turn to take a closer look at Coley’s argument.

What about premise (2’)? Here is my reconstruction of Coley’s argument for it:
Suppose the sanspsychist should embrace either (a) moral skepticism or (b)
Railton-style moral realism. Now consider the implications of each option:

1’. Therefore, if we affirm sanspsychism, then we should embrace either

3\. So, if we affirm sanspsychism, then we should refrain from affirming N.
(1, 2

Perhaps at this point one will raise Benacerraf’s epistemological objection to
knowledge of abstract objects: Knowledge requires causal contact with the
thing known. But causal contact is impossible with respect to abstract
objects; therefore, if moral (or mathematical, or philosophical) facts are
abstract, then we can’t have knowledge of them. However, given the certainty
and theoretical indispensability of many of these truths, it’s not clear why
intuitionists can’t here pull a G.E. Moore shift: “We have reliable belief
forming processes regarding mathematical and philosophical truths. If moral
facts lack causal powers, then so do these other sorts of facts. Therefore, if
moral facts lack causal powers, then our having reliable belief forming
processes does not require the facts about which we have beliefs to have
causal powers.” (Huemer 2016)

3\. So, if we affirm sanspychism then we should refrain from affirming N. (1,
2

I want to thank Scott Coley for his stimulating paper on evolutionary
debunking and arguments against theism. Coley’s paper argues that Sharon
Street’s Darwinian dilemma, when combined with philosophical naturalism,
defeats any epistemic grounds for moral realism the naturalist might have had.
But if so, then since arguments from evil and divine hiddenness each contain a
premise that crucially relies on the truth of moral realism, naturalists
cannot consistently appeal to such arguments as grounds for rejecting theism.
By bringing important recent work in contemporary meta-ethics to bear on the
problems of evil and divine hiddenness, Coley’s argument is a welcome
contribution to the dialogue concerning the epistemic credentials of theism
and naturalism.

Step 4: If we should affirm that selective evolutionary pressures aren’t
connected to the moral facts, then we should affirm that moral realism is
defeated by Street’s evolutionary debunking argument.

Regarding Step 3: A number of accounts of moral realism besides Railton’s have
been articulated and defended that allow — and sometimes insist — that
evolution has reliably shaped our system of evaluative judgments. Perhaps the
most relevant is neo-Aristotelian virtue theory, most notably developed and
defended by Rosalind Hursthouse, Philippa Foot, and (most recently) Micah
Lott. According to this version of virtue theory, moral goodness is analyzed
in terms of what is good for members of a given species, which in turn is
defined in terms of what allows its members to carry out their characteristic
life-cycle, which in turn has been shaped by evolutionary factors. On this
sort of account, moral knowledge is a kind of practical knowledge of how to
achieve one’s species-specific goods. Given this sort of account, it is
guaranteed that evolution will shape our evaluative judgments in a way that is
truth-tracking. For those individuals whose evaluative judgments fail to
reliably track the truth about what’s good for them are thereby selected out.

Is an intuitionist account of moral knowledge metaphysically problematic for
the sanspsychist? I don’t see why it would be. That view only rules out
supramundane minds, and Platonism doesn’t obviously require that such minds
exist.

1’. If we affirm sanspsychism, then we should embrace either moral skepticism
or

Start with (1’). Why should we accept it? Here is my reconstruction of Coley’s
argument for the premise :

Step 3: Therefore, if the sanspsychist should embrace moral skepticism, then
she should reject N.

In laying out Coley’s argument, let’s follow him by letting ‘N’ denote the
normative premise in an atheistic argument (such as in the arguments from evil
and divine hiddenness); letting ‘C’ denote a conclusion that theism is (at
least) probably false; and letting ‘sanspsychism’ refer to any view that
entails that no supramundane consciousness exists (e.g., a divine person of
some sort). Coley’s core argument then runs as follows:

Regarding Step 4: A number of non-natural moral realists have rejected this
premise. For example, moral intuitionists such as Michael Huemer argue that
moral truths are necessary truths, known via reason. Therefore, the way we
know moral truths is the same way we know other necessary truths (e.g. those
of mathematics and philosophy). And while there is as of yet no complete
account of the mechanics of a priori knowledge , this fact hasn’t led many to
deny that we have mathematical knowledge. But if not, then by the same token,
it shouldn’t lead one to reject moral knowledge.

Step 1: If we affirm sanspsychism, then we should embrace moral realism.

i. Assume throughout that ‘morality’ denotes only accounts of morality that
lack a divine source.

2’. If we should embrace either moral skepticism or Railton-style moral
realism,

4\. If we assent to C then we should affirm sanspsychism.

Step 2: If she should doubt the reliability of human moral cognition, then she
should reject N.

I have offered four main replies to Coley’s argument on behalf of the
naturalist or sanpsychist: (i) the debunking argument doesn’t rule out Kantian
constructivist accounts of meta-ethics; (ii) some forms of moral realism
appear to survive the debunking argument (e.g., Railton’s account, Huemer’s
account, Wielenberg’s account, and neo-Aristotelian accounts); (iii) there are
reasons to think that on any of the accounts above, our morality overlaps with
God’s if he should turn out to exist; and (iv) the problems of evil and divine
hiddenness can be seen as problems internal to theism itself, in which case
the naturalist or sanspsychist need not have substantive moral beliefs to
consistently raise them against theism.

I know of some Calvinist necessitarians. Do you think they're vulnerable to a
charge of contradiction between that and some other traditional theistic
commitment?

Hi Chris,  
  
Yes, for on the kind of necessitarianism at issue, if there is a god, then God
had to create this particular world (where the notion of necessity in play is
categorical necessity, and not mere hypothetical necessity (in Leibniz's sense
of the distinction), which is contrary to the doctrines of divine freedom and
divine sovereignty.  
  
Best,  
EA

